University of Virginia Library
^76'A1618aograph^arao,.B»g
pX DDD 372 ASM


<page 1>
ALDERMAN LIBRARY
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA
CHARLOTTESVILLE, VIRGINIA


<page 2>

<page 3>

<page 4>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA;
OR,
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES
OF MY
LITERARY LIFE AND OPINIONS.
BY S. T. COLERIDGE.
s -
TWO VOLUMES IN ON*.''
'::•:( ...
NEW-YORK:
PUBLISHED BYLEAVITT, LORD &. Co.
BOSTON:
CROCKER & BREWSTER.
1834.
/

<page 5>
.A Ik
IB34
R. Northway, Jr. Printer, Uttcai

<page 6>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA;
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHED
OF MY
LITERARY LIFE AND OPINIONS

<page 7>
F>R
.A Ik
R. Northway, Jr. Printer, Uticm

<page 8>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA;
OR
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHED
OF MY
LITERARY LIFE AND OPINlOJMb

<page 9>
So wenig er auch bestimmt seyn mag andere zu belehren, sa wunscht er dock
sich denen mitzutheilen, die er sick gleichgesinnt weiss odor hofft, deren Auzahl
aber in der Breite der Welt zerstreut ist: er wunscht sein Verhaltniss zu den
altesten Freunden wieder anzuknupfen, mit neuen es fortzusetzen, und in der
letzen generation sich wieder andere fur sein ubrige Leibenszeit zu geivinnen
Er wunscht der Jugend die Umwege zu ersparen, auf denen er sich selbst
verirrte. Goethe.
Translation.—Little call as he may have to instruct others, he wishes never-
theless to open out his heart to such as he either knows or hopes to be of like
mind with himself, but who are widely scattered in the world: he wishes to knit
anew his connections with his oldest friends, to continue those recently formed,
and to win other friends among the rising generation for the remaining course of
his life. He wishes to spare the young those circuitous paths, on which he him-
self had lost his way.

<page 10>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
CHAPTER I.
The motives of the present work—Reception of the Author's first publication—
The discipline of his taste at school—The effect of contemporary writers on
youthful minds—Bowles's sonnets—Comparison between the Poets before and
, since Mr. Pope.
It has been my lot to have had my name introduced, both in
conversation and in print, more frequently than I find it easy to
explain, whether I consider the fewness, unimportance, and limited
circulation of my writings, or the retirement and distance in which
I have lived, both from the literary and political world. Most
often it has been connected with some charge which I could not
acknowledge, or some principle which I had never entertained.
Nevertheless, had I had no other motive, or incitement, the reader
would not have been troubled with this exculpation. What my
additional purposes were, will be seen in the following pages. It
will be found, that the least of what I have written concerns myself
personally. I have used the narration chiefly for the purpose of
giving a continuity to the work, in part for the sake of the miscel-
laneous reflections suggested to me by particular events, but still
more as introductory to the statement of my principles in politics, religion, and philosophy, and the application of the rules, deduced
from philosophical principles, to poetry and criticism. But of the
objects which I proposed to myself, it was not the least important
to effect, as far as possible, a settlement of the long continued con-1troversy concerning the true nature of poetic diction: and, at the
same time, to define with the utmost impartiality, the real poetic
character of the poet, by whose writings this controversy was first
kindled, and has been since fuelled and fanned.
In 1794, when I had barely passed the verge of manhood, I pub-
lished a small volume of juvenile poems. They were received
with a degree of favor which, young as I was, I well knew was
1

<page 11>
10 BIOGRAPHIA UTERARIA.
bestowed on them not so much for any positive merit, as because
they were considered buds of hope, and promises of better works
to come. The critics of that day, the most flattering, equally with
the severest, concurred in objecting to them, obscurity, a general
turgidncss of diction, and a profusion of new-coined double epi-
thets.* The first is the fault which a writer is the least able to
detect in his own compositions; and my mind was not then suffi-
ciently disciplined to receive the authority of others, as a substitute
for my own conviction. Satisfied that the thoughts, such as they
were, could not have been expressed otherwise, or at least more
perspicuously, I forgot to inquire, whether the thoughts themselves
did not demand a degree of attention unsuitable to the nature and
objects of poetry. This remark, however, applies chiefly, though
not exclusively, to the Religious Musings. The remainder of the
charge I admitted to its full extent, and not without sincere acknow-
ledgments to both my private and public censors for their friendly
admonitions. In the after editions, I pruned the double epithets
with no sparing hand, and used my best efforts to tame the swell
and glitter, both of thought and diction; though, in truth, these
parasite plants of youthful poetry had insinuated themselves into
my longer poems with such intricacy of union, that I was obliged
to omit disentangling the weed, from the fear of snapping the flower.
From that period to the date of the present work, I have published
nothing, with my name, which could, by any possibility, have come
before the board of anonymous criticism. Even the three or four
poems, printed with the works of a friend, as far as they were cen-
sured at all, were charged with the same or similar defects, though,
* The authority of Milton and Shakspeare may be usefully pointed out to young
authors. In the Comus, and earlier poems of Milton, there is a superfluity of
double epithets; while in the Paradise Lost we find very few, and in the Paradise
Regained, scarce any. The same remark holds almost equally true of the Love's
Labor Lost, Romeo and Juliet, Venus and Adonis, and Lucrece, compared with
the Lear, Macbeth, Othello, and Hamlet of our great dramatist. The rule for
the admission of double epithets seems to be this: either that they should be
already denizens of our language, such as blood-stained, terror-stricken, self-
applauding: or when a new epithet, or one found in books only, is hazarded, that
it, at least, be one word, not two words made one by mere virtue of theprinter's
hyphen. A language which, like the English, is almost without cases, is indeed
in its very genius unfitted for compounds. If a writer, every time a compounded
word suggests itself to him, would seek for some other mode of expressing the
same sense, the chances are always greatly in favor of his finding a better word.
"Tanquam scopulum sic vites insolens verbum," is the wise advice of Caesar to
the Roman orators, and the precept applies with double force to the writers in
our own language. But it must not be forgotten, that the same Caesar wrote a
grammatical treatise for the purpose of reforming the ordinary language, by
ringing it to a greater accordance with the principles of logic or universal
grammar.

<page 12>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 11
I am persuaded, not with equal justice: with an excess op orna-
ment, in addition to strained and elaborate diction, (Vide
thecriticism on the " Ancient Mariner," in the Monthly and Criti-
cal Reviewers of the first volume of the Lyrical Ballads.) May I
be permitted to add, that, even at the early period of my juvenile
poems, I saw and admitted the superiority of an austerer, and more
natural style, with an insight not less clear than 1 at present possess.
My judgment was stronger than were my powers of realizing its
dictates; and the faults of my language, though indeed partly owing
to a wrong choice of subjects, and the desire of giving a poetic
coloring to abstract and metaphysical truths, in which a new world
then seemed to open upon me, did yet, in part likewise, originate in
unfeigned diffidence of my own comparative talent. During seve-
ral years of myyouthund early manhood, I reverenced those who had
re-introduced the manly simplicity of the Grecian, and of our own
elder poets, with such enthusiasm, as made the hope seem presump-
tuous of writing successfully in the same style. Perhaps a similar
process has happened to others; but my earliest poems were marked by an ease and simplicity which I have studied, perhaps with infe- Irior success, to impress on my later compositions.
At school I enjoyed the inestimable advantage of a very sensible,
though at the same time, a very severe master. He * early mould-
ed my taste to the preference of Demosthenes to Cicero, of Homer and Theocritus to Virgil, and again Virgil to Ovid. He habituated
me to compare Lucretius, (in such extracts as I then read,) Te-
rence, and, above all, the chaster poems of Catullus, not only with
the Roman poets of the, so called, silver and brazen ages, but with
even those of the Augustan era; and on grounds of plain sense and
universal logic, to see and assert the superiority of the former, in
the truth and nativeness, both of their thoughts and diction. At
the same time that we were studying the Greek tragic poets, he
made us read Shakspeare and Milton as lessons: and they were
lessons, too, which required most time and trouble to bring up, so
as to escape his censure. I learnt from him that poetry, even that
of the loftiest, and, seemingly, that of the wildest odes, had a logic
of its own, as severe as that of science; and more difficult, because
more subtle, more complex, and dependent on more, and more
'* The Rev. James Bowyer, many years Head Master of the Grammar school,
Christ Hospital.

<page 13>
12 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
fugitive causes. In the truly great poets, he would say, there is af
reason assignable, not only for every word, but for the position of
every word; and 1 well remember, that, availing himself of the
synonymes to the Homer of Didymus, he made us attempt to show,
with regard to each, why it would not have answered the same
purpose; and wherein consisted the peculiar fitness of the word
in the original text.
In our own English compositions, (at least for the last three years
of our school education,) he showed no mercy to phrase, metaphor,
or image, unsupported by a soundjsense, or where the same sense
might have been conveyed with ec|ual_force and dignity in plainer
words. Lute, harp, and lyre; muse, muses, and inspirations; Pe-
gasus, Parnassus, and Hipocrene, were all an abomination to him.
In fancy, I can almost hear him now, exclaiming, " Harp? Harp?
Lyre? Pen and ink, boy, you mean! Muse, boy, Muse? Your
Nurse's daughter, you mean! Pierian spring? Oh, aye! the
cloister-pump, I suppose!" Nay, certain introductions, similes,
and examples, were placed by name on a list of interdiction.
Among the similes, there was, I remember, that of the Manchineel
fruit, as suiting equally well with too many subjects; in which,
however, it yielded the palm at once to the example of Alexander
and Clytus, which was equally good and apt, whatever might be
the theme. Was it Ambition? Alexander and Clytus! Flattery?
Alexander and Clytus! Anger? Drunkenness? Pride? Friend-
ship? Ingratitude? Late repentance? Still, still Alexander and . *Clytus! At length, the praises of agriculture having been exem-
plified in the sagacious observation, that, had Alexander been
holding the plough, he would not have run his friend Clytus through
with a spear, this tried and serviceable old friend was banished
by public edict in secula seculorum. I have sometimes ventured
to think, that a list of this kind, or an index cxpurgatorious of cer-
tain well-known and ever-returning phrases, both introductory and
transitional, including the large assortment of modest egotisms, and
flattering^illeisj»s; &c, &c. might be hung up in our law-courts,
and both houses of parliament, with great advantage to the public,
as an important saving of national time, an incalculable relief to his
Majesty's ministers, but, above all, as ensuring the thanks of the
country attorneys and their clients, who have private bills to carry
through the house. „__^~*—— --« """

<page 14>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 13
Be this as it may, there was one custom of our master which I
cannot pass over in silence, because I think it imitable and worthy
of imitation. He would often permit our theme exercises, under
some pretext of want of time, to accumulate, till each lad had four
or five to be looked over. Then placing the whole number abreast
on his desk, he would ask the writer, why this or that sentence
might not have found as appropriate a place under this or that thesis:
and if no satisfying answer could be returned, and two faults of the
same kind were found in one exercise, the irrevocable verdict fol-
lowed; the exercise was torn up, and another on the same subject
to be produced, in addition to the tasks of the day. The reader
will, I trust, excuse this tribute of recollection to a man, whose
severities, even now, not seldom furnish the dreams, by which the
blind fancy would fain interpret to the mind the painful sensations of
distempered sleep, but neither lessen nor dim the deep sense of my
moral and intellectual obligations. He sent us to the University
excellent Latin and Greek scholars, and tolerable Hebraists. Yet
our classical knowledge was the least of the good gifts which
we derived from his zealous and conscientious tutorage. He is
now gone to his final reward, full of years, and full of honors, even
of those honors which were dearest to his heart, as gratefully be-
stowed by that school, and still binding him to the interests of that school, in which he had been himself educated, and to which, during
his whole life, he was a dedicated thing.
From causes, which this is not the place to investigate, no models
of past times, however perfect, can have the same vivid effect on
the youthful mind, as the productions of contemporary genius.
The discipline my mind had undergone, " Ne falleretur rotundo
sono et versuum cursu, cincinnis et floribus ; sed ut inspiceret quid-
nam subesset, qua* sedes, quod firmamentum, quis fundus verbis;
an figure essent mera ornatura et orationis fucus: vel sanguinis e
materiee ipsius corde effluentis rubor quidam nativus et incalescen-
tia genuina;" removed all obstacles to the appreciation of excel-
lence in style without diminishing my delight. That I was thus
prepared for the perusal of Mr. Bowles's sonnets and earlier poems,
at once increased their influence and my enthusiasm. The great
works of past ages seem, to a young man, things of another race,
in respect to which his faculties must remain passive and submiss,
even as to the stars and mountains. But the writings of a con-

<page 15>
14 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA*
temporary, perhaps not many years elder than himself, surrounded
by the same circumstances, and disciplined by the same manners,
possess a reality for him, and inspire an actual friendship as of a
man for a man. His very admiration is the wind which fans and
feeds his hope. The poems themselves assume the properties of
flesh and blood. To recite, to extol, to contend for them, is but
the payment of a debt due to one who exists to receive it.
There are indeed modes of teaching which have produced, and
are producing, youths of a very different stamp; modes of teaching,
in comparison with which we have been called on to despise our
great public schools and universities,
"In whose halls are hung
Armory of the invincible knights of old"—
modes by which children are to be metamorphosed into prodigies.
And prodigies, with a vengeance, have I known thus produced!
Prodigies of self-conceit, shallowness, arrogance and infidelity!
Instead of storing the memory, during the period when the memo-
ry is the predominant faculty, with facts for the after exercise of
the judgment; and instead of awakening, by the noblest models, the
fond and unmixed love and admiration, which is the natural
and graceful temper of early youth: these nurselings of improved
pedagogy are taught to dispute and decide; to suspect all but their
own and their lecturer's wisdom, and to hold nothing sacred from
their contempt but their own contemptible arrogance; boy-gradu-
ates in all the technicals, and in all the dirty passions and impu-
dence of anonymous criticism. To such dispositions alone can the
admonition of Pliny be requisite—"Neque enim debet operibus
ejus obesse, quod vivit. An si inter eos, quos nunquam vidimus,
floruisset, non solum libros ejus, verum etiam imagines conquirere-
mus, ejusdem nunc honor prssentis, et gratia quasi satietate langu-
escet? At hoc pravum, malignumque est, non admirari hominem
admirationc dignissimuni) quia videre, complecti, nee laudare tan-
tum, verum etiam amare contingit." Plin. Epist. Lib. I.
I had just entered on my seventeenth year, when the sonnets of
Mr. Bowles, twenty in number, and just then published in a quarto
pamphlet, were first made known and presented to me by a school-
fellow, who had quitted us for the university, and who, during the
whole time that he was in our first form, (or, in our school language,


<page 16>
BIOGRAfHIA L1TERARIA. 15
a Grecian,) had been my patron and protector. I refer to Dr.
Middleton, the truly learned, and every way excellent Bishop of
Calcutta:
"Qui laudibus amplis
Ingenium celebrare meum, calamumque solebat,
Calcar agens animo validam. Non omnia terrse
Obruta! Vivit amor, vivit dolor! Oranegatur
Dulcia conspicere; et flere meminisse * relictum est"
Petr. Ep. Lib. 1. Ep. 1.
It was a double pleasure to me, and still remains a tender recol-
lection, that I should have received from a friend so revered, the
first knowledge of a poet, by whose works, year after year, I was
so enthusiastically delighted and inspired. My earliest acquaintan-
ces will not have forgotten the undisciplined eagerness and impetu-
ous zeal with which I labored to make proselytes, not only of my
companions, but of all with whom I conversed, of whatever rank,
and in whatever place. As my school finances did not permit me
to purchase copies, I made, within less than a year and an half,
more than forty transcriptions, as the best presents I could offer to
those who had in any way won my regard. And with almost equal
delight did I receive the three or four following publications of the
same author.
Though I have seen and known enough of mankind to be well
aware that I shall perhaps stand alone in my creed, and that it will
be well if I subject myself to no worse charge than that of singu-
larity, I am not therefore deterred from avowing, that I regard, and
ever have regarded the obligations of intellect, among the most
sacred of the claims of gratitude. A valuable thought, or a par-
ticular train of thoughts, gives me additional pleasure, when I can
safely refer and attribute it to the conversation or correspondence
of another. My obligations to Mr. Bowles were indeed important,
and for radical good. At a very premature age, even before my
fifteenth year, I had bewildered myself in metaphysics, and in theo-
logical controversy. Nothing else pleased me. History, and
particular facts lost all interest in my mind. Poetry, (though for
a school-boy of that age, I was above par in English versification,
* I am most happy to have the necessity of informing the reader, that since this
Eassage was written, the report of Dr. Middleton's death, on his voyage to India,
as been proved erroneous. He lives, and long may he live; for I dare prophecy,
that with his life only will his exertions for the temporal and spiritual welfare of
his fellow men be limited.

<page 17>
16 BIOGIUPHI A L1TERARIA.
and had already produced two or three compositions vvhich, I may
venture to say, without reference to my age, were somewhat above
mediocrity, and which had gained me more credit than the sound
good sense of my old master was at all pleased with,) poetry itself,
yea novels and romances, became insipid to me. In my friendless
wanderings on our leave days,* (for I was an orphan, and had
scarce any connexions in London,) highly was I delighted if any
passenger, especially if he were drest in black, would enter into
conversation with me. For I soon found the means of directing it
to my favorite subjects
Of providence, fore-knowledge, will, and fate,
Fix'd fate, free will, fore-knowledge absolute,
And found no end in wandering mazes lost.
This preposterous pursuit was, beyond doubt, injurious, both to my
natural powers, and to the progress of my education. It would
perhaps have been destructive, had it been continued; but from
this I was auspiciously withdrawn, partly indeed by an accidental
introduction to an amiable family, chiefly, however, by the genial
influence of a style of poetry so tender, and yet so manly, so natu-
ral and real, and yet so dignified and harmonious, as the sonnets,
&c. of Mr. Bowles! Well were it for me, perhaps, had I never
relapsed into the same mental disease; if I had continued to pluck
the flower and reap the harvest from the cultivated surface, instead
of delving in the unwholesome quicksilver mines of metaphysic
depths. But if, in after time, I have sought a refuge from bodily
pain and mismanaged sensibility, in abstruse researches, which
exercised the strength and subtlety of the understanding without
awakening the feelings of the heart; still there was a long and
blessed interval, during which my natural faculties were allowed to
expand, and my original tendencies to develop themselves; my
fancy, and the love of nature, and the sense of beauty in forms and
sounds.
The second advantage, which I owe to my early perusal and ad-
miration of these poems, (to which let me add, though known to me
at a somewhat later period, the Lewsdon Hill of Mr. Crow,) bears
more immediately on my present subject. Among those with
whom I conversed, there were, of course, very many who had
* The Christ Hospital phrase, not for holidays altogether, but for those on which
the boys are permitted to go beyond the precincts of the school.

<page 18>
BIOGRAPHIA LITEIIARIA. IT
formed their taste, and their notions of poetry, from the writings of
Mr. Pope and his followers ; or, to speak more generally, in that
school of French poetry, condensed and invigorated by English
understanding, which had predominated from the last century. I
was not blind to the merits of this school, yet, as from inexperience
of the world, and consequent want of sympathy with the general
subjects of these poems, they gave me little pleasure, I doubtless
undervalued the kind, and with the presumption of youth, withheld from its masters the legitimate name of poets. I saw that the excellence of this kind consisted in just and acute observations on
men and manners in an artificial state of society, as its matter and substance; and in the logic of wit, conveyed in smooth aYid strong)
epigrammatic couplets, as its /oral. Even when the subject was
addressed to the fancy, or the intellect, as in the Rape of the Lock,
or the Essay on Man; najywhen it was a consecutive narration,
as in that astonishing product of matchless talent and ingenuity,
Pope's translation of the Illiad; still a point was looked for at the end of each second line, and the whole was as it were a sorites, or, if I may exchange a logical for a grammatical metaphor, a conjunction disjunctive of epigrams. Meantime the matter and diction
seemed to me characterised not so much by poetic thoughts, as by
thoughts translated into the language of poetry. On this last point, I had occasion to render my own thoughts gradually more and more plain to myself, by frequent amicable disputes concerning
Darwin's Botanic Garden, which, for some years, was greatly
extolled, not only by the reading public in general, but even by
those whose genius and natural robustness of understanding ena-
bled them afterwards to act foremost in dissipating these " painted
mists" that occasionally rise from the marshes at the foot of Parnassus. During my first Cambridge vacation, I assisted a friend
in a contribution for a literary society in Devonshire; and in this I
remember to have compared Darwin's work to the Russian palace
of ice, glittering, cold and transitory. In the same essay, too, I
assigned sundry reasons, chiefly drawn from a comparison of pas-
sages in the Latin poets with the original Greek, from which they
were borrowed, for the preference of Collins's odes to those of
Gray; and of the simile in Shakspeare:
"How like a younker or a prodigal,
The skarfed bark puts from her native bay

<page 19>
18 BIOGRAPHIA LITEKARIA.
llugg'd and embraced by the strumpet wind'
How like a prodigal doth she return,
With over-weather'd ribs and ragged sails,
Lean, rent, and beggar'd by the strumpet wind!"
to the imitation in the bard:
"Fair laughs the morn, and soft the zephyr blows,
While proudly riding o'er the azure realm,
In gallant trim the gilded vessel goes,
Youth at the prow and Pleasure at the helm, «
Regardless of the sweeping whirlwind's sway,
That, hush'din grim repose, expects its evening prey."
(In which, by-the-by, the words "realm" and "sway" are rhymes
dearly purchased.) I preferred the original, on the ground that in
the imitation it depended wholly in the compositor's putting, or not
putting, a small capital, both in this and in many other passages of
the same poet, whether the words should be personifications, or
mere abstracts. I mention this because, in referring various lines
in Gray to their original in Shakspeare and Milton, and in the clear
perception how completely all the propriety was lost in the transfer;
I was, at that early period, led to a conjecture which, many years
afterwards, was recalled to me from the same thought having been
started in conversation, but far more ably, and developed more fully,
by Mr, Wordsworth; namely, that this style of poetry, which I
have characterised above, as translations of prose thoughts into
poetic language, had been kept up by, if it did not wholly arise
from, the custom of writing Latin verses, and the great importance
attached to these exercises in our public schools. Whatever might
have been the case in the fifteenth century, when the use of the
Latin tongue was so general among learned men that Erasmus is
said to have forgotten his native language ; yet, in the present day,
it is not to be supposed that a youth can think in Latin, or that he
can have any other reliance on the force or fitness of his phrases,
but the authority of the author from whence he has adopted them.
Consequently, he must first prepare his thoughts, and then pick out,
from Virgil, Horace, Ovid, or perhaps more compendiously from
his Gradus,* halves and quarters of lines in which to embody them.
* In the Nutricia of Politian, there occurs this line:
"Pura coloratos interstrepit unda lapillos."
Casting my eye on a University prize poem, I met this line:
"Lactea purpureos interstrepit unda lapillos."

<page 20>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARU. id
I never object to a certain degree of disputatiousness in a young
man from the age of seventeen to that of four or five-and-twenty,
provided I find him always arguing on one side of the question.
The controversies occasioned by my unfeigned zeal for the honor of a favorite contemporary, then known to me only by his works, were of great advantage in the formation and establishment of my
taste and critical opinions. In my defence of the lines running
into each other, instead of closing at each couplet; and of natural
language, neither bookish nor vulgar, neither redolent of the lamp
or of the kennel, such as / will remember thee; instead of the same
thought, tricked up in the rag-fair finery of
Thy image on her wing
Before my fancy's eye shall memuky bring,
I had continually to adduce the metre and diction of the Greek
poets, from Homer to Theocritus, inclusive; and still more of our
elder English poets, from Chaucer to Milton. Nor was this all. But as it was my constant reply to authorities brought against me
from later poets of great name, that no authority could avail in op-
position to Truth, Nature, Logic, and the Laws of Universal
Grammar; actuated, too, by my former passion for metaphysical
investigations, I labored at a solid foundation on which, permanent';'ly, to ground my opinions in the component faculties of the human
mind itself, and their comparative dignity and importance. Ac-
cording to the faculty, or source, from which the pleasure given by
any poem or passage was derived, I estimated the merit of such
poem or passage. As the result of all my reading and meditation,
I abstracted two critical aphorisms, deeming them to comprise the
conditions and criteria of poetic style; first, that not the poem which
we have read, but that to which we return, with the greatest
pleasure, possesses the genuine power, and claims the name of
essential poetry. Second, that whatever lines can be translated
into other words of the same language, without diminution of their
significance, either in sense or association, or in any worthy feel-
ing, are so far vicious in their diction. Be it, however, observed, that I excluded from the list of worthy feelings, the pleasure derived
Now look out in the Gradus for Purus, and you find, as the first synonyme,
lac/eus ; for coloratus, and the first synonyme is purpureat. 1 mention this by
way of elucidating one of the most ordinary processes in the ferruminatwn of
these centos.

<page 21>
20 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
from mere novelty, in the reader, and the desire of exciting wonder-
ment at his powers in the author. Oftentimes since then, in pe-
rusing French tragedies, I have fancied two marks of admiration at
the end of each line, as hyoroglyphics of the author's own admira-
tion at his own cleverness. Our genuine admiration of a great
poet is a continuous under-current of feeling; it is every where
present, but seldom any where as a separate excitement. I was
wont boldly to affirm, that it would be scarcely more difficult to
push a stone out from the pyramids with the bare hand, than to
alter a word, or the position of a word, in Milton or Shakspeare, (in
their most important works at least,) without making the author
say something else, or something worse than he does say. One
great distinction I appeared to myself to see plainly, between even
the characteristic faults of our elder poets, and the false beauty of
the moderns. In the former, from Donne to Cowley, we find
the most fantastic out-of-the-way thoughts, but in the most pure
and genuine mother English; in the latter, the most obvious thoughts
in language the most fantastic and arbitrary. Our faulty elder
poets sacrificed the passion, and passionate flow of poetry, to the
subtleties of intellect, and to the starts of wit; the moderns to the
glare and glitter of a perpetual, yet broken and heterogeneous im-
agery, or rather to an amphibious something, made up half of image,
and half of abstract* meaning. The one sacrificed the heart to
the head, the other both heart and head to point and drapery.
The reader must make himself acquainted with the general style
of composition that was at that time deemed poetry, in order to
understand and account for the effect produced on me by the Son-
nets, the Monody at Matlock, and the Hope, of Mr. Bowles;
for it is peculiar to original genius to become less and less striking,
in proportion to its success in improving the taste and judgment of
its contemporaries. The poems of West, indeed, had the merit
of chaste and manly diction, but they were cold, and, if I may so
express it, only dead-colored; while in the best of Warton's, there
is a stiffness, which too often gives them the appearance of imita-
tions from the Greek. Whatever relation, therefore, of cause or
impulse, Percy's collection of Ballads may bear to the most popular
"I remember a ludicrous instance in the poem of a young tradesman:
"No more will I endure love's pleasing pain,
Or round my heart't leg tie his galling chain.''

<page 22>
BIOGRAP-HIA LITERARIA. 21
poems of the present day; yet, in the more sustained and elevated
style of the then living poets, Bowles and Cowper .* were, to the best of my knowledge, the first who combined natural thoughts
with natural diction; thefirst who reconciled the heart with the head.
It is true, as I have before mentioned, that from diffidence in
my own powers, I for a short time adopted a laborious and florid
diction, which I myself deemed, if not absolutely vicious, yet of
very inferior worth. Gradually, however, my practice conformed
to my better judgment; and the compositions of my twenty-fourth
and twenty-fifth years, (ex. gr. the shorter blank Verse poems, "the
lines which are now adopted in the introductory part of the Vision,
in the present collection in Mr. Southey's Joan of Arc, 2d book,
1st edition, and the Tragedy of Remorse,) are not more below my
present ideal in respect of the general tissue of the style, than those
of the latest date. Their faults were, at least, a remnant of the
former leaven, and among the many who have done me the honor
of putting my poems in the same class with those of my betters, the one or two who have pretended to bring examples of affected
simplicity from my volume, have been able to adduce but one in-
stance, and that out of a copy of verses half ludicrous, half splene-
tic, which I intended, and had myself characterized, as sermoni pro-
priora.
Every reform, however necessary, will by weak minds be carried
to an excess, that itself will need reforming. The reader will ex-
cuse me for noticing, that I myself was the first to expose risu
honesto the three sins of poetry, one or the other of which is the
most likely to beset a young writer. So long ago as the publica-
tion of the second number of the monthly magazine, under the
name of Nehemiah Higgenbottom, I contributed three sonnets,
the first of which had for its object to excite a good-natured laugh, at the spirit of doleful egotism, and at the recurrence of favorite
phrases, with the double defect of being at once trite and licentious.
* Cowper's Task was published some time before the sonnets of Mr. Bowles,
but I was not familiar with it till many years afterwards. The vein of satire
which runs through that excellent poem, together with the sombre hue of its
religious opinions, would probably, at that time, have prevented its laying any
strong hold on my affections. The love of nature seems to have led Thomson
to a cheerful religion; and a gloomy religion to have led Cowper to a love of
nature. The one would carry his fellow-men along with him into nature; the
other flies to nature from his fellow-men. In chastity of diction, however, and
the harmony of blank verse, Cowper leaves Thomson unmeasurably below
him; yet still I feel the latter to have been the born poet.

<page 23>
(£i BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
The second, on low, creeping language and thoughts, under the
pretence of simplicity. And the third, the phrases of which were
borrowed entirely from my own poems, on the indiscriminate use
of elaborate and swelling language and imagery. The reader will
find them in the note * below, and will, I trust, regard them as re-
printed for biographical purposes, and not for their poetic merits.
So general at that time, and so decided was the opinion concerning
the characteristic vices of my style, that a celebrated physician,
(now, alas! no more,) speaking of me, in other respects, with his
usual kindness, to a gentleman who was about to meet me at a
dinner party, could not, however, resist giving him a hint not to
mention the " House that Jack built" in my presence, for " that I
was as sore as a bile about that sonnet;" he not knowing that I
was, myself, the author of it.
'Sonnet I.
Pensive at eve, on the hard world I mused,
And my poor heart was sad; so at the Moon
I gazed, and sighed, and sighed; for ah, how soon
Eve saddens into night! mine eyes perused
With tearful vacancy the dampy grass
That wept and glitter'd in the paly ray:
And I did pause me on my lonely way,
And mused me on the wretched ones that pass
O'er the bleak heath of sorrow. But alas!
Most of myself I thought! when it befel,
That the soothe spirit of the breezy wood
Breath'd in mine ear: "All this is very well,
But much of one thing is for no thing good."
Oh my poor hearts inexplicable swell!
Sonnet II.
Oh I do love thee, meek Simplicity!
For of thy lays the lulling simpleness
Goes to my heart, and soothes each small distress,
Distress tho' small, yet haply great to me;
'Tis true, on Lady Fortune's gentlest pad
I amble on; and yet I know not why
So sad I am! but should a friend and I
Frown, pout and part, then I am very sad.
And then with sonnets and with sympathy
My dreamy bosom's mystic woes I pall;
Now of my false friend plaining plaintively,
Now raving at mankind in general;
But whether sad or fierce, 'tis simple all,
All very simple, meek Simplicity!

<page 24>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 23
Sonnet III.
And this reft house, is that, the which he built,
Lamented Jack! and here bis malt he pil'd,
Cautious in vain | these rats, that squeak so wild,
Squeak not unconscious of their father's guilt.
Did he not see her gleaming thro' the glade?
Belike 'twas she, the maiden all forlorn.
VVhattho' she milk no cow with crumpled horn,
Yet, aye she-haunts the dale where erst she stray'd;
And aye, beside her stalks her amorous knight!
Still on his thighs their wonted brogues are worn,
And thro' those brogues, still tatter'd and betorn,
His hindward charms gleam an unearthly white.
Ah! thus thro' broken clouds at night's high noon,
Peeps in fair fragments forth the full orb'd harvest moon!
The following anecdote will not be wholly out of place here, and may, perhaps,
amuse the reader. An amateur performer in verse expressed to a common friend,
a strong desire to be introduced to me, but hesitated in accepting my friend's
immediate offer, on the score that "he was, he must acknowledge, the author of
a confounded severe epigram on my Ancient Mariner, which had given me great
pain." I assured my friend that if the epigram was a good one, it would only
increase my desire to become acquainted with the author, and begged to hear it
recited: when, to my no less surprise than amusement, it proved to be one
which I had myself some time before written, and inserted in the Morning Post.
To the Author of the Ancient Mariner.
Your poem must eternal be,
Dear sir, it cannot fail,
For 'tis incomprehensible,
And without bead or tail.

<page 25>
CHAPTER II.
Supposed irritability of men of genius—Brought to the test of facts—Causes
and Occasions of the charge—Its injustice.
I have often thought that it would be neither uninstructive nor
unamusing to analyze and bring forward into distinct conscious-
ness, that complex feeling, with which readers in general take part
against the author, in favor of the critic; and the readiness with
which they apply to all poets the old sarcasm of Horace upon the
scribblers of his time, "Genus irritabile vatum." A debility and
dimness of the imaginative power, and a consequent necessity of
reliance on the immediate impressions of the senses, do, we well
know, render the mind liable to superstition and fanaticism. Hav-
ing a deficient portion of internal and proper warmth, minds of this
class seek in the crowd circumfana for a warmth in common, which
they do not possess singly. Cold and phlegmatic in their own
nature, like damp hay, they heat and inflame by coacervation; or,
like bees, they become restless and irritable through the increased
temperature of collected multitudes. Hence the German word for
fanaticism (such, at least, was its original import,) is derived from
the swarming of bees, namely, Schwarmen, Schwarmery. The
passion being in an inverse proportion to the insight, that the more
vivid as this the less distinct, anger is the inevitable consequence.
The absence of all foundation within their own minds for that
which they yet believe both true and indispensable for their safety
and happiness, cannot but produce an uneasy state of feeling, an
involuntary sense of fear, from which nature has no means of res-
cuing herself but by anger. Experience informs us, that the first
defence of weak minds is to recriminate.
"There's no Philosopher but sees,
That rage and fear are one disease;
Tho' that may burn, and this may freeze,
They're both alike the ague."
Mad Ox.
But where the ideas are vivid, and there exists an endless power
of combining and modifying them, the feelings and affections blend

<page 26>
BIOGRAPHIA I.ITERARIA. 25
more easily and intimately with these ideal creations, than with the
objects of the senses; the mind is affected by thoughts, rather than
by things 5 and only then feels the requisite interest, even for the most important events and accidents, when by means of meditation they have passed into thoughts. The sanity of the mind is between
superstition with fanaticism on the one hand, and enthusiasm with
indifference and a diseased slowness to action on the other. For
the conceptions of the mind may be so vivid and adequate as to
preclude that impulse to the realizing of them, which is strongest
and most restless in those who possess more than mere talent, (or
the faculty of appropriating and applying the knowledge of others,)
yet still want something of the creative and self-sufficing power of
absolute genius. For this reason, therefore, they are men of com-
manding genius. While the former rest content between thought
and reality, as it were in an intermundium, of which their own liv-
ing spirit supplies the substance, and their imagination the ever
Varying form; the latter must impress their preconceptions on the
world without, in order to present them back to their own view
with the satisfying degree of clearness, distinctness, and individu-
ality. These, in tranquil times, are formed to exhibit a perfect
poem in palace, or temple, or landscape-garden; or a tale of ro-
mance in canals that join sea with sea, or in walls of rock, which,
shouldering back the billows, imitate the power, and supply the
benevolence of nature to sheltered navies; or in aqueducts, that,
arching the wide vale from mountain to mountain, give a Palmyra
to the desert. But, alas! in times of tumult, they are the men
destined to come forth as the shaping spirit of Ruin, to destroy the
wisdom of ages, in order to substitute the fancies of a day, and to
change kings and kingdoms, as the wind shifts and shapes the
clouds.* The records of biography seem to confirm this theory.
The men of the greatest genius, as far as we can judge from their
own works, or from the accounts of their contemporaries, appear to
have been of calm and tranquil temper in all that related to them- vselves. In the inward assurance of permanent fame, they seem to
have been either indifferent or resigned with regard to immediate /
* " Of old things all are over old,
Of good things none are good enough;—
We'll show that we can help to frame
A world of other stuff."
3

<page 27>
26 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
reputation. Through all the works of Chaucer, there reigns a
cheerfulness, a manly hilarity, which makes it almost impossible
to doubt a correspondent habit of feeling in the author himself.
Shakspeare's evenness and sweetness of temper were almost pro-
verbial in his own age. That this did not arise from ignorance of
his own comparative greatness, we have abundant proof in his son-
nets, which could scarcely have been known to Mr. Pope * when
he asserted that our great bard "grew immortal in his own despite."
Speaking of one whom he had celebrated, and contrasting the du-
ration of his works with that of his personal existence, Shakspeare
adds:
"I too will have my kings, that take From me the sign of life and death;
Kingdoms shall shift about like clouds,
Obedient to my breath."
Wordsworth's Rob Roy
"Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
Tho' I once gone, to all the world must die;
The earth can yield me but a common grave,
When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie.
Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read;
And tongues to be your being shall rehearse,
When all the breathers of this world are dead ,
You still shall live, such virtue hath my pen,
Where breath most breathes, e'en in the mouth of men."
Sonnet 81st.'
"Mr. Pope was under the common error of his age, an error far from being
sufficiently exploded, even at the present day. It consists, (as I explained at
large, and proved in detail in my public lectures,) in mistaking for the essentials
of the Greek stage, certain rules which the wise poets imposed upon themselves,
in order to render all the remaining parts of the drama, consistent with those that
had been forced upon them by circumstances independent of their will; out of
which circumstances the drama itself arose. The circumstances in the time of
Shakspeare, which it was equally out of his power to alter, were different, and
such as, in my opinion, allowed a far wider sphere, and a deeper and more human
interest. Critics are too apt to forget that rules are but means to an end; conse-
quently, where the ends are different, the rules must be likewise so. We must
have ascertained what the end is before we can determine what the rules ought
to be. Judging under this impression, I did not hesitate to declare my full con-
viction, that the consummate judgment of Shakspeare, not only in the general
construction, but in all the detail of his dramas, impressed me with greater won-
der than even the might of his genius, or the depth of his philosophy. The sub-
stance of these lectures I hope soon to publish; and it is but a debt of justice to
myself and my friends, to notice, that the first course of lectures, which differed
from the following courses only by occasionally varying the illustrations of the
same thoughts, was addressed to very numerous, and, I need not add, respectable
audiences, at the royal institution, before Mr. Schlegel gave his lectures on the
same subjects at Vienna.


<page 28>

BIOGRAPHIA LITEKARIA.
27
1 have taken the first that occurred; but Shakspeare's readiness to
praise his rivals, ore pleno, and the confidence of his own equality
with those whom he deemed most worthy of his praise, are alike
manifested in the 86th sonnet :-
"Was it the proud foil sail of bis great verse,
Bound for the praise of ail-too precious you,
That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,
Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew 1
Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write
Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?
No, neither he, nor his compeers by night
Giving him aid, my verse astonished.
He, nor that affable familiar ghost,
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,
As victors of my silence cannot boast;
I was not sick of any fear from thence!
But when your countenance fill'd up his line,
Then lack'd I matter, that enfeebled mine."
In Spenser, indeed, we trace a mind constitutionally tender, del
icato, and, in comparison with his three great compeers, I had
almost said, effeminate; and this additionally saddened by the un-
just persecution of Burleigh, and the severe calamities which over-
whelmed his latter days. These causes have diffused over all his
compositions "a melancholy grace," and have drawn forth occa-
sional strains, the more pathetic from their gentleness. But no
where do we find the least trace of irritability, and still less of
quarrelsome or affected contempt of his censurers.
The same calmness, and even greater self-possession, may be
affirmed of Milton, as far as his poems and poetic character are
concerned. He reserved his anger for the enemies of religion, freedom, and his country. My mind is not capable of forming a
more august conception, than arises from the contemplation of this
great man in his latter days: poor, sick, old, blind, slandered, per-
secuted,
"Darkness before, and danger's voice behind," ( ■
in an age in which he was as little understood by the party for
whom as by that against whom, he had contended; and among
men before whom he strode so far as to dwarf himself by the dis-
tance; yet still listening to the music of his own thoughts, or if
■

<page 29>
28 BlOGRAPHIA. LITEKARIA.
X
additionally cheered, yet cheered only by the prophetic faith of two
or three solitary individuals, he did nevertheless
'Argue not
Against Heaven's hand or will, nor bate a jot
Of heart or hope; but still bore up, and steer'd
Right onward."
From others only do we derive our knowledge that Milton, in his
latter day, had his scorners and detractors; and even in his day of
youth and hope, that he had enemies would have been unknown to
us, had they not been likewise the enemies of his country.
I am well aware, that in advanced stages of literature, when there
exists many and excellent models, a high degree of talent, combined
with taste and judgment, and employed in works of imagination,
will acquire for a man the name of a great genius; though even
that analogon of genius, which, in certain states of society, may
even render his writings more popular than the absolute reality
could have done, would be sought for in vain in the mind and tem-
per of the author himself. Yet even in instances of this kind, a
close examination will often detect that the irritability, which has
been attributed to the author's genius as its cause, did really origin-
ate in an ill conformation of body, obtuse pain, or constitutional de-
fect of pleasurable sensation. What is charged to the author, be-
longs to the man, who would probably have been still more impatient,
but for the humanizing influences of the very pursuit, which yet
bears the blame of his irritability.
How then are we to explain the easy credence generally given to
this charge, if the charge itself be not, as we have endeavored to
show, supported by experience 1 This seems to me of no very dif-
ficult solution. In whatever country literature is widely diffused,
there will be many who mistake an intense desire to possess the
reputation of poetic genius, for the actual powers, and original ten-
dencies which constitute it. But men, whose dearest wishes are
fixed on objects wholly out of their own power, become in all cases
more or less impatient and prone to anger. Besides, though it
may be paradoxical to assert, that a man can know one thing, and
believe the opposite, yet assuredly, a vain person may have so
habitually indulged the wish, and persevered in the attempt to appear
what he is not, as to become himself one of his own proselytes.
Still, as this counterfeit and artificial persuasion must differ, even

<page 30>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 29
in the person's own feelings, from a real sense of inward power,
what can be more natural than that this difference should betray
itself in suspicious and jealous irritability? Even as the flowery
sod, which covers a hollow, may be often detected by its shaking
and trembling?
But, alas! the multitude of books, and the general diffusion of
literature, have produced other and more lamentable effects in the
world of letters, and such as are abundant to explain, though by no
means to justify, the contempt with which the best grounded com-
plaints of injured genius are rejected as frivolous, or entertained as
matter of merriment. In the days of Chaucer and Gower, our
language might (with due allowance for the imperfections of a simile)
be compared to a wilderness of vocal reeds, from which the favor-
ites only of Pan or Apollo could construct even the rude Syrinx;
and from this the constructors alone could elicit strains of music.
But now, partly by the labors of successive poets, and in part by the
more artificial state of society and social intercourse, language,
mechanized as it were into a barrel-organ, supplies at once both in-
strument and tune. Thus even the deaf may play, so as to delight
the many. Sometimes, (for it is with similes as it is with jests at
a wine table, one is sure to suggest another,) I have attempted to
illustrate the present state of our language, in its relation to litera-
ture, by a press-room of larger and smaller stereotype pieces,
which, in the present anglo-gallican fashion of unconnected, epi-
grammatic periods, it requires but an ordinary portion of ingenuity
to vary indefinitely, and yet still produce something, which, if not
sense, will be so like it as to do as well. Perhaps better; for it
spares the reader the trouble of thinking; prevents vacancy, while
it indulges indolence; and secures the memory from all danger of
an intellectual plethora. Hence, of all trades, literature at present
demands the least talent or information; and, of all modes of liter-
ature, the manufacturing of poems. The difference, indeed, be-
tween these and the works of genius, is not less than between an
egg and an egg-shell; yet at a distance they both look alike.
Now it is no less remarkable than true, with how little examina-
tion works of polite literature are commonly perused, not only by
the mass of readers, but by men of the first rate ability, till some
accident or chance * discussion have aroused their attention, and
* In the course of my lectures, I had occasion to point out the almost faultless
position and choice of words, in Mr. Pope's original compositions, particularly in

<page 31>
30 BIOGRA-PHIA L1TERA1UA.
put them on their guard. And hence, individuals below mediocrity
not less in natural power than acquired knowledge; nay, bunglers
that had failed in the lowest mechanic crafts, and whose presump-
tion is in due proportion to their want of sense and sensibility;
men who, being first scribblers from idleness and ignorance, next
become libellers from envy and malevolence, have been able to
drive a successful trade in the employment of booksellers, nay, have
raised themselves into temporary name and reputation with the
public at large, by that most powerful of all adulation, the appeal
to the bad and malignant passions of mankind.* But as it-is the
liia satires and moral essays, for the purpose of comparing them with his trans-
lation of Homer, which I do not stand alone in regarding as the main source of
our pseudo-poetic diction. And this, by-the-by, is an additional confirmation of
a remark made, I believe, by Sir Joshua Reynolds, that next to the man who
formed and elevated the taste of the public, he that corrupted it is commonly the
greatest genius. Among other passages, I analyzed, sentence by sentence, and
almost word by word, the popular lines,
"As when the moon, resplendant lamp of light," &c.
much in the same way as has been since done, in an excellent article on Chal-
mers' British Poets, in the Quarterly Review. The impression on the audience,
in general, was sudden and evident: and a number of enlightened and highly ed-
ucated individuals, who at different times afterwards addressed me on the sub-
ject, expressed their wonder, that truth so obvious should not have struck them
before; but at the same time acknowledged (so much had they been accustomed,
in reading poetry, to receive pleasure from the separate images and phrases suc-
cessively, without asking themselves whether the collective meaning was sense
or nonsense,) that they might in all probability have read the same passage again
twenty times with undiminished admiration, and without once reflecting, that
"usga. <pasiv»jv otfXtpi 6VXijVj]v ipaivsi' aoirff Stso." (i. e. the stars around, or
near the full moon, shine pre-eminently bright) conveys a just and happy image
of a moonlight sky: while it is difficult to determine whether in the lines,
"Around her throne the vivid planets roll,
And stars unnumber'd gild the glowing pole,"
the sense or the diction be the more absurd. My answer was, that though I had
derived peculiar advantages from my school discipline, and though my general
theory of poetry was the same then as now, I had yet experienced the same sen-
sations myself, and felt almost as if I had been newly couched, when by Mr.
Wordsworth's conversation, I had been induced to re-examine with impartial
strictness Gray's celebrated elegy. I had long before detected the defects in
"the Bard;" but "the Elegy" I had considered as proof against all fair attacks;
and to this day I cannot read either without delight, and a portion of enthusiasm.
At all events, whatever pleasure I may have lost by the clearer perception of
the faults in certain passages, has been more than repaid to me, by the additional
delight with which I read the remainder.
'* Especially "in this age op personality, this age of literary and political
gossiping, when the meanest insects are worshipped with a sort of Egyptian
superstition, if only the brainless head be atoned for by the sting of personal ma-
lignity in the tail! When the most vapid satires have become the objects of a
keen public interest, purely from the number of contemporary characters named
in the patchwork notes, (which possess, however, the comparative merit of being more poetical than the text,) and because, to increase the stimulus, the author
has sagaciously left his own name for whispers and conjectures! In an age, when
even sermons are published with a double appendix stuffed with names—in a gen-
eration so transformed from the characteristic reserve of Britons, that from the

<page 32>
TilOORAPiriA I.ITERARIA. 31
nature of scorn, envy, and all malignant propensities, to require a
quick change of objects, such writers are sure, sooner or later, to
awake from their dream of vanity to disappointment and neglect,
with embittered and envenomed feelings. Even during their short-
lived success, sensible, in spite of themselves, on what a shifting
foundation it rested, they resent the mere refusal of praise, as a
robbery, and at the justest censures kindle at once into violent and
undisciplined abuse; till the acute disease'ehanging into chronical,
the more deadly as the less violent, they become the fit instruments
of literary detraction and moral slander. They are then no longer
to be questioned without exposing the complainant to ridicule, be-
cause, forsooth, they are anonymous critics, and authorized as
"synodical individuals" * to speak of themselves plurali majestati-
co! As if literature formed a cast, like that of the paras in Hin-
dostan, who, however maltreated, must not dare to deem themselves wronged! As if that, which in all other cases adds a deeper
die to slander, the circumstance of its being anonymous, here acted
only to make the slanderer inviolable! Thus, in part, from the
accidental tempers of individuals, (men of undoubted talent, but
not men of genius,) tempers rendered yet more irritable by their
desire to appear men of genius; but still more effectively by the
excesses of the mere counterfeits both of talent and genius; the
number, too, being so incomparably greater of those who are
thought to be, than of those who really are men of real genius; and
in part from the natural, but not therefore the less partial and unjust
distinction, made by the public itself between literary and all other
property; I believe the prejudice to have arisen, which considers
an unusual irascibility concerning the reception of its products as
characteristic ofgenius. It might correct the moral feelings of a
ephemeral sheet of a London newspaper, to the everlasting Scotch Professorial
Quarto, almost every publication exhibits or flatters the epidemic distemper; that the very 'last year's rebuses'in the Ladies' Diary, are answered in a serious elegy 'on my father's death,'1 with the name and habitat of the elegiac CEdipin
subscribed'; and 'other ingenius solutions were likewise given' to the said rebuses
—not, as heiietofore, *y Crito, Philander, A, B, Y, &c.—but by fifty or sixty
plain English surnames at full length, with their several places of abode! In an
age, when a bashful Philalethes, or Phileleutheros is as rare on the title-pages, and
among the signatures of our magazines, as a real name used to be in the days of
our shy and notice-shunning grandfathers! When (more exquisite than all) I
see an Epic Poem (spirits of Maroand Mseonides make ready to welcome your
new compeer!) advertised with the special recommendation, that the said Epic
Poem contains more than an hundred names of living persons."
Friend, No. 10.
* A phrase of Andrew Marvel's.

<page 33>
SA BIOGKAPHIA LITERARIA.
numerous class of readers, to suppose a review set on foot, the ob-
ject of which was to criticise all the chief works presented to the
public by our ribbon-weavers, calico-printers, cabinet-makers, and
china-manufacturers; a review conducted in the same spirit, and
which should take the same freedom with personal character as
our literary journals. They would scarcely, I think, deny their
belief, notonly that the "genus irritabile" would be found to in-
clude many other species beside that of bards, but that the irritability
of trade would soon reduce the resentments of poets into mere
shadow-fights (pdofAa^iag) in the comparison. Or is wealth the
only rational object of human interest? Or even if this were ad-
mitted, has the poet no property in his works? Or is it a rare or
culpable case, that he who serves at the altar of the muses should
be compelled to derive his maintenance from the altar, when, too,
he has perhaps deliberately abandoned the fairest prospects of rank
and opulence in order to devote.himself, an entire and undistracted
man, to the instruction or refinement of his fellow-citizens? Or
should we pass by all higher objects and motives, all disinterested
benevolence, and even that ambition of lasting praise, which is at
once the crutch and ornament, which at once supports and betrays
the infirmity of human virtue; is the character and property of the
individual who labors for our intellectual pleasures, less entitled to
a share of our fellow feeling than that of the wine merchant or mil-
liner? Sensibility, indeed, both quick and deep, is not only a cha-
racteristic feature, but may be deemed a component part of genius.
But it is no less an essential mark of true genius, that its sensibility
is excited by any other cause more powerfully than by its own per-
sonal interests, for this plain reason, that the man of genius lives
most in the ideal world, in which the present is still constituted by
the future or the past; and because his feelings have been habitu-
ally associated with thoughts and images, to the number, clearness,
and vivacity of which the sensation of self is always in an inverse
proportion. And yet, should he perchance have occasion to repel
some false charge, or to rectify some erroneous censure, nothing is
more common, than for the many to mistake the general liveliness
of his manner and language, whatever is the subject, for the effects
of peculiar irritation from its accidental relation to himself.*
* This is one instance, among many, of deception, by telling the half of a fact,
and omitting the other half, when it is from their mutual counteraction and neu-

<page 34>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 33
For myself, if from my own feelings, or from the less suspicious
test of the observations of others, I had been made aware of any
literary testiness or jealousy, I trust that I should have been, how-
ever, neither silly or arrogant enough to have burthened the imper-
fection on genius. But an experience, (and I should not need
documents in abundance to prove my words, if I added,) a tried
experience of twenty years has taught me that the original sin of
my character consists in a careless indifference to public opinion,
and to the attacks of those who influence it; that praise and ad-
miration have become, yearly, less and less desirable, except as
marks of sympathy; nay, that it is difficult and distressing to me,
to think with any interest even about the sale and profit of my
works, important as, in my present circumstances, such considera-
tions must needs be. Yet it never occurred to me to believe, or
fancy, that the quantum of intellectual power bestowed on me by
nature or education was in any way connected with this habit of
my feelings; or, that it needed any other parents, or fosterers,
than constitutional indolence, aggravated into languor by ill-health;
the accumulating embarrassments of procrastination; the mental
cowardice, which is the inseparable companion of procrastination,
and which makes us anxious to think and converse on any thing
rather than on what concerns ourselves; in fine, all those close
vexations, whether chargeable on my faults or my fortunes, which
leave me but little grief to spare for evils comparatively distant and
alien.
Indignation at literary wrongs, I leave to men born under happier
stars. I cannot afford it. But so far from condemning those who
can, I deem it a writer's duty, and think it creditable to his heart,
to feel and express a resentment proportioned to the grossness of
the provocation, and the importance of the object. There is no
profession on earth which requires an attention so early, so long, or
tralization, that the whole truth arises, as a tertiam illiquid different from either.
Thus in Dryden's famous line, "Great wit" (which here means genius) "to mad-
ness sure is near allied." Now, as far as the profound sensibility, which is doubt-
less one of the components of genius, were alone considered, single and unbal-
anced, it might be fairly described as exposing the individual to a greater chance
of mental derangement; but then a more than usual rapidity of association, a
more than usual power of passing from thought to thought, and image to image,
is a component equally essential; and in the due modification of each by the
other, the genius itself consists; so that it would be just as fair to describe the
earth as in imminent danger of exorbitating, or of falling into the sun, according
as the assertor of the absurdity confined his attention either to the projectile or to
the attractive force exclusively.

<page 35>
34 BIOGRAPHI A LITERARIA.
so unintermitting, as that of poetry; and, indeed, as that of literary
composition in general, if it be such as at all satisfies the demands
both of the taste and of sound logic. How difficult and delicate a
task even the mere mechanism of verse is, may be conjectured from
the failure of those who have attempted poetry late in life. Where,
then, a man has, from his earliest youth, devoted his whole being
to an object which, by the admission of all civilized nations in all
ages, is honorable as a pursuit, and glorious as an attainment;
what, of all that relates to himself and his family, if only we except
his moral character, can have fairer claims to his protection, or
more authorize acts of self-defence than the elaborate products of
his intellect, and intellectual industry 1 .Prudence itself would com-
mand us to show, even if defect or diversion of natural sensibility
had prevented us from feeling, a due interest and qualified anxiety
for the offspring and representatives of our nobler being. I know
it, alas! by woful experience! I have laid too many eggs in the
hot sand of this wilderness, the world, with ostrich carelessness
and ostrich oblivion. The greater part, indeed, have been trod un-
der foot, and are forgotten; but yet no small number have crept
forth into life, some to furnish feathers for the caps of others, and
still more to plume the shafts in the quivers of my enemies; of
them that, unprovoked, have lain in wait against my soul.
"Sic vos, non vobis mellificatis, apes!"
An instance in confirmation of the note, p. 27, occurs to me as I
am correcting this sheet, with the Faithful Shepherdess open
before me. Mr. Seward first traces Fletcher's lines:
"More foul diseases than e'er yet the hot
Sun bred through his burnings, while the dog
Pursues the raging lion, throwing the fog
And deadly vapour from his angry breath,
Filling the lower world with plague and death, "—
To Spenser's Shepherd's Calendar/
"The rampant lion hunts he fast
With dogs of noisome breath,
Whose baleful barking brings, in haste,
Pyne, plagues, and dreary death!"
He then takes occasion to introduce Homer' simile of the sight of
Achilles's shield to Priam, compared with the Dog Star, literally
thus—

<page 36>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
35
"For this indeed is most splendid, but it was made an evil sign,
and brings many a consuming disease to wretched mortals." Noth-
ing can be more simple as a description, or more accurate as a
simile; which, says Mr. S. is thus finely translated by Mr. Pope:

"Terrific Glory! for his burning breath
Taints the red air with fevers, plagues, and death!"
Now here (not to mention the tremendous bombast) the Dog
Star, so called, is turned into a real Dog—a very odd Dog—a fire,
fever, plague, and death-breathing, red-air-tainting Dog: and the
whole visual likeness is lost, while the likeness in the effects is ren-
dered absurd by the exaggeration. In Spenser and Fletcher, the
thought is justifiable; for the images are at least consistent, and it
was the intention of the writers to mark the seasons by this allego-
ry of visualized Puns.
•
.
■
'
'
^
.

<page 37>
CHAPTER III.
The author's obligations to critics, and the probable occasion—Principles of mod-
ern criticism—Mr. Southey's works and character. To anonymous critics in reviews, magazines, and news journals
of various name and rank, and to satirists, with or without a name, in
verse or prose, or in verse text aided by prose comment, I do seriously
believe and profess, that I owe full two thirds of whatever reputa-
tion and publicity I happen to possess. For when the name of an
individual has occurred so frequently, in so many works, for so
great a length of time, the readers of these works, (which with a
shelf or two of Beauties, Elegant Extracts and Anas, form
nine tenths of the reading public)* cannot but be familiar with the
name, without distinctly remembering whether it was introduced
for an eulogy or for censure. And this becomes the more likely, if
(as I believe) the habit of perusing periodical works may be prop-
erly added to Averrhoe's f catalogue of Anti-Mnemonics, or
weakeners of the memory. But where this has not been the case,
* For as to the devotees of the circulation libraries, I dare not compliment their
pass lime, or rather kill time,with the name of reading. Call it rather a sort of
beggarly day-dreaming, during which the mind of the dreamer furnishes for itself
nothing but laziness and a little mawkish sensibility; while the whole materiel
and imagery of the doze is supplied ab extra by a sort of mental camera obscura
manufactured at the printing office, which pro tempore fixes, reflects, and trans-
mits the moving phantasms of one man's delirium, so as to people the barrenness
of an hundred other brains afflicted with the same trance or suspension of all
common sense and all definite purpose. We should, therefore, transfer this spe-
cies of amusement, (if indeed those can be said to retire a musia, who were never
in their company, or relaxation be attributable to those whose bows are never
bent,) from the genus, reading, to that comprehensive class characterized by
the power of reconciling the contrary yet co-existing propensities of human na-
ture, namely, indulgence of sloth and hatred of vacancy. In addition to novels
and tales of chivalry in prose or rhyme, (by which last I mean neither rhythm
nor metre,) this genus comprises as its species, gaming, swinging, or swaying on
a chair or gate; spitting over a bridge; smoking; snuff-taking; tete-a-tete quar-
rels after dinner between husband and wife; conning, word by word, all the ad-
vertisements of the daily advertiser in a public house on a rainy day, &c. &c. &c.
tEx. gr. Pediculos e capillis excerptus in arenamjacere incontusos; eating
of unripe fruit; gazing on the clouds, and (in generc)on moveable things suspend-
ed in the air; riding among a multitude of camels; frequent laughter; listening
to a series of jests and hurmorous anecdotes, as when (so to modernize the learned Saracen's meaning) one man's droll story of an Irishman, inevitably oc-
casions another's droll story of a Scotchman, which, again, by the same sort of
conjunction disjunctive, leads to some etourderie of a Welchman, and that again
to some sly hit of a Yorkshireman; the habit of reading tomb-stones in church-
yards, &c. By-the-by, this catalogue, strange as it may appear, is not insuscepti-
ble of a sound psychological commentary.

<page 38>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 37
yet the reader will be apt to suspect, that there must be something
more than usually strong and extensive in a reputation, that could
either require or stand so merciless and long-continued a cannon-
ading. Without any feeling of anger, therefore, (for which, indeed,
on my own account, I have no pretext,) I may yet be allowed to
express some degree of surprise, that after having run the critical
gauntlet for a certain class of faults which I had, nothing having
come before the judgment seat in the interim, 1 should, year after
year, quarter after quarter, month after month, (not to mention sun-
dry petty periodicals of still quicker revolution," or weekly or diur-
nal,") have been for at least seventeen years consecutively, dragged
forth by them into the foremost ranks of the proscribed, and forced
to abide the brunt of abuse, for faults directly opposite, and which
I certainly had not. How shall I explain this?
Whatever may have been the case with others, I certainly cannot
attribute this persecution to personal dislike, or to envy, or to feelings
of vindictive animosity. Not to the former; for, with the excep-
tion of a very few who are my intimate friends, and were so before
they were known as authors, I have had little other acquaintance
with literary characters than what may be implied in an accidental
introduction, or casual meeting in a mixt company. And, as far as
words and looks can be trusted, I must believe that, even in these
instances, I had excited no unfriendly disposition.* Neither
* Some years ago, a gentleman, the chief writer and conductor of a celebrated
review, distinguished by its hostility to Mr. Southey, spent a day or two at Kes-
wick. That he was, without diminution on this account, treated with every hos-
pitable attention by Mr. Southey and myself, I trust I need not say. But one
thing I may venture to notice, that at no period of my life do I remember to have
received so many, and such high colored compliments in so short a space of time.
He was likewise circumstantially informed by what series of accidents it had
happened, that Mr. Wordsworth, Mr. Southey, and I, had become neighbors; and
how utterly unfounded was the supposition, that we considered ourselves as be-
longing to any common school, but that of good sense, confirmed by the long-
established models of the best times of Greece, Rome, Italy, and England; and
still more groundless the notion, that Mr. Southey, [for, as to myself, I have pub-
lished so little, and that little of so little importance, as to make it almost ludi-
crous to mention my name at all,] could have been concerned in the formation of
a poetic sect with Mr. Wordsworth, when so many of his works had been publish-
ed, not only previously to any acquaintance between them, but before Mr. Words-
worth himself had written any thing but in a diction ornate, and uniformly sus-
tained; when, too, the slightest examination will make it evident, that between
those and the after writings of Mr. Southey, there exists no other difference than
that of a progressive degree of excellence from progressive development of
power, and progressive facility from habit and increase of experience. Yet
among the first articles which this man wrote after his return from Keswick, we
were characterized as "the School of whining and hypochondriacal poets that
haunt the Lakes." In reply to a letter from the same gentleman, in which he
had asked me, whether I was in earnest in prefering the style of Hooker to that
of Dr. Johnson, and Jeremy Taylor to Burke, I stated, somewhat at large, the
comparative excellences and defects which characterised our best prose writers,

<page 39>
38 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
by letter, or in conversation, have I ever had dispute or controver-
sy beyond the common social interchange of opinions. Nay,
where I had reason to suppose my convictions fundamentally differ-
ent, it has been my habit, and I may add, the impulse of my nature,
to assign the grounds of my belief, rather than the belief itself;
and not to express dissent, till I could establish some points of com-
plete sympathy, some grounds common to both sides, from which
to commence its explanation.
Still less can I place these attacks to the charge of envy. The
few pages which I have published, are of too distant a date; and
the extent of their sale a proof too conclusive against their having
been popular at any time, to render probable, I had almost said pos-
sible, the excitement of envy on their account; and the man who
should envy me on any other, verily he must be envy-mad!
Lastly; with as little semblance of reason could I suspect any
animosity towards me from vindictive feelings as the cause. I have
before said, that my acquaintance with literary men has been limit-
ed and distant; and that I have had neither dispute nor controver-
sy. From my first entrance into life, I have, with few and short
intervals, lived either abroad or in retirement. My different essays
on subjects of national interest, published at different times, first in
the Morning Post and then in the Courier, with my courses of lec-
tures on the principles of criticism as applied to Shakspeare and
Milton, constitute my whole publicity; the only occasions on which
from the reformation to the first half of Charles II.; and that of those who had
flourished during the present reign, and the preceding one. About twelve months
afterwards, a review appeared on the same subject, in the concluding paragraph
of which the reviewer asserts, that his chief motivefor entering into the discus-
sion, was to separate a rational and qualified admiration of our elder writers, from
the indiscriminate enthusiasm of a recent school, who praised what they did not
understand, and caricatured what they were unable to imitate. And, that no
doubt might be left concerning the persons alluded to, the writer annexes the
names 01 Miss Bailie, R. Southey, Wordsworth, and Coleridge. For that
which follows, I have only hear-say evidence, but yet such as demands my belief;
viz. that on being questioned concerning this apparently wanton attack,
more especially with reference to Miss Bailie, the writer had stated as his motives,
that this lady, when at Edinburgh, had declined a proposal of introducing him to
her; that Mr. Southey had written against him; and Mr. Wordsworth had talked
contemptuously of him; but that as to Coleridge, he had noticed him merely be-
cause the names of Southey and Wordsworth and Coleridge always went to-
gether. But if it were worth while to mix together, as ingredients, half the an-
ecdotes which I either myself know to be true, or which 1 have received from
men incapable of intentional falsehood, concerning the characters, qualifications,
and motives of our annoymous critics, whose decisions are oracles for our read-
ing public, I might safely borrow the words of the apocryphal Daniel; " Give me
leave, O Sovereign Public, and I shall slay this dragon without sword or staff."
For the compound would be the "Pitch, and fat, and hair, which Daniel took, and
did seethe them together, and made lumps thereof, and put into the dragon's mouth,
and so the dragon burst in sunder; and Daniel said, lo, these are the gods ye
worship."

<page 40>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. SO

I could offend any member of the republic of letters. With one
solitary exception, in which my words were first mis-stated, and
then wantonly applied to an individual, I could never learn that I
had excited the displeasure of any among my literary contempora-
ries. Having announced my intention to give a course of lectures
on the characteristic merits and defects of the English poetry in its
different eras; first, from Chaucer to Milton; second, from Dry-
den inclusive to Thompson; and third, from Cowperto the present
day, I changed my plan, and confined my disquisition to the two
former eras, that I might furnish no possible pretext for the unthink-
ing to misconstrue, or the malignant to misapply, my words, and
having stamped their own meaning on them, to pass them as current
coin in the marts of garrulity or detraction.
Praises of the unworthy are felt by ardent minds as robberies of
the deserving; and it is too true, and too frequent, that Bacon,
Harrington, Machiavel and Spinosa, are not read, because Hume,
Condillac, and Voltaire are. But in promiscuous company, no pru-
dent man will oppugn the merits of a contemporary in his own sup-
posed department; contenting himself with praising in his turn those whom he deems excellent. If I should ever deem it my du-
ty at all to oppose the pretensions of individuals, I would oppose
them in books which could be weighed and answered, in which I
could evolve the whole of my reason and feelings, with their requi-
site limits and modifications; not in irrecoverable conversation, where, however strong the reasons might be, the feelings that prompt-
ed them would assuredly be attributed by some one or other to
envy and discontent. Besides, I well know, and I trust, have acted
on that knowledge, that it must be the ignorant and injudicious who
extol the unworthy; and the eulogies of critics without taste or
judgment, are the natural reward of authors without feeling or ge-
nius. "Sint unicuique sua premia."
How, then, dismissing, as I do, these three causes, am I to ac-
count for attacks, the long continuance and inveteracy of which it
would require all three to explain 1 The solution may seem to have
been given, or at least suggested, in a note to a preceding page.
/ was in habits of intimacy with Mr. Wordsworth and Mr. Sou-
they! This, however, transfers, rather than removes, the difficulty.
Be it, that by an unconscionable extension of the old adage, " nos-
citur a socio," my literary friends are never under the water-fall of

<page 41>
40 BtOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
criticism, but I must be wet through with the spray: yet, how came
the torrent to descend upon them?
First, then, with regard to Mr. Southey. I well remember the
general reception of his earlier publications, viz. the poems pub-
lished with Mr. Lovell, under the names of Moschus and Bion;
the two volumes of poems under his own name, and the Joan of
Arc. The censures of the critics by profession are extant, and
may be easily referred to :—careless lines, inequality in the merit
of the different poems, and, (in the lighter works,) a predilection
for the strange and whimsical; in short, such faults as might have
been anticipated in a young and rapid writer, were indeed sufficient-
ly enforced. Nor was there at that time wanting, a party spirit to
aggravate the defects of a poet, who, with all the courage of un-
corrupted youth, had avowed his zeal for a cause which he deemed
that of liberty, and his abhorrence of oppression, by whatever name
consecrated. But it was as little objected by others, as dreamt of
by the poet himself, that he preferred careless and prosaic lines on
rule and of forethought, or, indeed, that he pretended to any other
art or theory of poetic diction beside that which we may all learn
from Horace, Quintilian, the admirable dialogue de Causis Corrup-
ts Eloquentise, or Strada's Prolusions; if, indeed, natural good
sense, and the early study of the best models in his own language,
had not infused the same maxims more securely, and, if I may ven-
ture the expression, more vitally. All that could have been fairly
deduced, was, that in his taste and estimation of writers, Mr. Sou-
they agreed far more with Warton than with Johnson. Nor do I
mean to deny that, at all times, Mr. Southey was of the same mind
with Sir Philip Sydney, in preferring an excellent ballad in the hum-
blest style of poetry, to twenty indifferent poems that strutted in the
highest. And by what have his works, published since then, been
I characterized, each more strikingly than the preceding, but by great-
er splendor, a deeper pathos, profounder reflections, and a more
sustained dignity of language and of metre? Distant may the pe-
riod be—but whenever the time shall come when all his works shall
be collected by some editor worthy to be his biographer, I
trust, that an excerpta of all the passages in which his writings,
name, and character, have been attacked, from the pamphlets and
periodical works of the last twenty years, may be an accompani-
ment. Yet that it would prove medicinal in after times I dare not

<page 42>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
41

hope; for as long as there are readers to be delighted with calum-
ny, there will be found reviewers to calumniate, and such readers
will become, in all probability, more numerous in proportion as a
still greater diffusion of literature shall produce an increase of sci-
olists, and sciolism brings with it petulance and presumption. In
times of old, books were as religious oracles; as literature advan-
ced, they next became venerable preceptors ; they then descended
to the rank of instructive friends; and, as their numbers increased,
they sunk still lower, to that of entertaining companions; and, at
present, they seem degraded into culprits to hold up their hands at
the bar of every self-elected, yet not the less peremptory, judge,
who chooses to write from humour or interest, from enmity or arro-
gance, and to abide the decision, (in the words of Jeremy Taylor,)
"of him that reads in malice, or him that reads after dinner."
The same gradual retrograde movement may be traced in the
relation which the authors themselves have assumed toward their
readers. From the lofty address of Bacon: "these are the med-
itations of Francis of Yerulam, which, that posterity should be pos-
sessed of, he deemed their interest;" or from dedication to mon-
arch or pontiff, in which the honour given was asserted in equipoise
to the patronage acknowledged from Pindar's
-'6*' aXXoi-
-gi <5'aXXoi (ASyptXoi. to S'ssxarov xogv-
-<pS<rai /3ajiX£ugi. (Ji/Tjxiri
IIoMrTttlVS tfOpglOV.
Ei'»j jS T£ tStOV
Te rogga8e vixagogoig
OfwXsiv, "irjoipavrov jopi'av xa&' EX-
-Xavaj sovra tfavra.
Olymp. Od. I.
Poets and Philosophers, rendered diffident by their very number,
addressed themselves to " learned readers ;" then aimed to concil-
iate the graces of " the candid reader;" till the critic, still rising as
the author sunk, the amateurs of literature, collectively, were erect-
ed into a municipality of judges, and addressed as the town!
And now, finally, all men being supposed able to read, and all read-
/

<page 43>
42 BIOGRAPIIIA LITERARIA.
ers able to judge, the multitudinous public, shaped into personal
unity by the magic of abstraction, sits nominal despot on the throne
of criticism. But, alas! as in other despotisms, it but echoes the
decisions of its invisible ministers, whose intellectual claims to the
guardianship of the muses seem, for the greater part, analogous to
the physical qualifications which adapt their oriental brethren for the
superintendence of the harem. Thus, it is said that St. Nepomuc
was installed the guardian of bridges, because he had fallen over
one, and sunk out of sight; thus, too, St. Cecilia is said to have
been first propitiated by musicians, because, having failed in her
own attempts, she had taken a dislike to the art, and all its suc-
cessful professors. But I shall probably have occasion, hereafter,
to deliver my convictions more at large concerning this state of
things, and its influences on taste, genius, and morality.
In the " Thalaba," the " Madoc,"-and still more evidently in the
unique * " Cid," the "Kehama," and as last, so best, the " Don
Roderick," Southey has given abundant proof, " se cogitasse quam
sit magnum dare aliquid in manus hominum: nee persuadere sibi
posse, non saepe tractandum quod placere et semper et omnibus
cupiat." Plin. Ep. Lib. 7. Ep. 17. But, on the other hand, I
guess, that Mr. Southey was quite unable to comprehend wherein
could consist the crime or mischief of printing half a dozen or
more playful poems; or, to speak more generally, compositions
which would be enjoyed or passed over, according as the taste and
humour of the reader might chance to be; provided they contain-
ed nothing immoral. In the present age, " periturse parcere char-
tae," is emphatically an unreasonable demand. The merest trifle
he ever sent abroad had tenfold better claims to its ink and paper,
than all the silly criticisms, which prove no more than that the crit-
ic was not one of those for whom the trifle was written, and than
all the grave exhortations to a greater reverence for the public. As
if the passive page of a book, by having an epigram or doggerel
tale impressed on it, instantly assumed at once locomotive power
* I have ventured to call it " unique," not only because I know no work of the
kind in our language (if we except afew chapters of the old translation of Frois-
sart,) none which, uniting the charms of romance and history, keeps the imagina-
tion so constantly on the wing, and yet leaves so much for after reflection; but
likewise, and chiefly, because it is a compilation which, in the various excellen-
ces of translation, selection, and arangement, required, and proves greater ge-
nius in the compiler, as living in the present state of society, than in the original
composers.

<page 44>
J5I0GRAPHIA LITERARIA. 43
and a sort of ubiquity, so as to flutter and buz in the ear of the
public to the sore annoyance of the said mysterious personage.
But what gives an additional and more ludicrous absurdity to these
lamentations is the curious fact, that if, in a volume of poetry, the
critic should find poem or passage which he deems more especially
worthless, he is sure to select and reprint it in the review; by
which, on his own grounds, he wastes as much more paper than
the author as the copies of a fashionable review are more numer-
ous than those of the original book ; -in some, and those the most
prominent instances, as ten thousand to five hundred. I know
nothing that surpasses the vileness of deciding on the merits of a
poet or painter (not by characteristic defects; for where there is
genius, these always point to his characteristic beauties; but) by
accidental failures or faulty passages; except the impudence of
defending it, as the proper duty, and most instructive part, of criti-
cism. Omit, or pass slightly over, the expression, grace, and
grouping of Raphael's figures; but ridicule in detail the knitting-
needles and broom-twigs, that are to represent trees in his back
grounds; and never let him hear the last of his galli-pots! Ad-
mit, that the Allegro and Penseroso of Milton are not without mer-
it; but repay yourself for this concession, by reprinting at length
the two poems on the University Carrier /Asa fair specimen of
his sonnets, quote " a book was writ of late called Tetrachordon;"
and as characteristic of his rhythm and metre, cite his literal
translation of the first and second psalm! In order to justify your-
self, you need only assert, that had you dwelt chiefly on the beau-
ties and excellences of the poet, the admiration of these might
seduce the attention of future writers from the objects of their love
and wonder, to an imitation of the few poems and passages in
which the poet was most unlike himself,
But till reviews are conducted on far other principles, and with
far other motives; till, in the place of arbitrary dictation and petu-
lant sneers, the reviewers support their decisions by reference to
fixed canons of criticism, previously established and deduced from
the nature of man, reflecting minds will pronounce it arrogance in
them thus to announce themselves, to men of letters, as the guides
of their taste and judgment. To the purchaser and mere reader,
it is, at all events, an injustice. He who tells me that there are

<page 45>
44 BIOGRAPHIA LITEHARIA.
defects in a new work, tells me nothing which I should not have
taken for granted without his information. But he who points out
and elucidates the beauties of an original work, does indeed give
me interesting information, such as experience would not have au-
thorized me in anticipating. And as to compositions which the
authors themselves announce with "Hrec ipsi novimus esse nihil,"
why should we judge by a different rule two printed works, only
because the one author was alive, and the other in his grave 1 What
literary man has not regretted the prudery of Spratt in refusing to
let his friend Cowley appear in his slippers and dressing gown 1 I
am not perhaps the only one who has derived an innocent amuse-
ment from the riddles, conundrums, tri-syllable lines, &c. &c. of
Swift and his correspondents, in hours of languor, when, to have
read his more finished works would have been useless to myself,
and, in some sort, an act of injustice to the author. But I am at
a loss to conceive by what perversity of judgment these relaxations
of his genius could be employed to diminish his fame as the writer
of "Gulliver's Travels," and the "Tale of the Tub." Had Mr.
Southey written twice as many poems of inferior merit, or partial
interest, as have enlivened the journals of the day, they would have
added to his honour with good and wise men, not merely, or prin-
Icipally, as proving the versatility of his talents, but as evidences of
J;the purity of that mind which, even in its levities, never wrote a line
which it need regret on any moral account.
I have in imagination, transferred to the future biographer the du-
ty of contrasting Southey's fixed and well earned fame, with the
abuse and indefatigable hostility of his anonymous critics from his
early youth to his ripest manhood. But I cannot think so ill of
human nature as not to believe, that these critics have already ta-
ken shame to themselves, whether they consider the object of their
abuse in his moral or his literary character. For reflect but on the
variety and extent of his acquirements! He stands second to no
man, either as an historian or as a bibliographer; and when I re-
gard him as a popular essayist, (for the articles of his compositions
in the reviews are, for the greater part, essays on subjects of deep
V \or curious interest, rather than criticisms on particular works,*) I
look in vain for any writer, who has conveyed so much information,
* See the articles on Methodism, in the Quarterly Review; the small volume
of the New System of Education, &c.

<page 46>
BIOGHAPHIA LITERARIA. 45

r
from so many and such recondite sources, with so many just and
original reflections, in a style so lively and poignant, yet so uniform- / \ly classical and perspicuous; no one, in short, who has combined
so much wisdom with so much wit; so much truth and knowledge
with so much life and fancy. His prose is always intelligible and
always entertaining. In poetry he has attempted almost every j Jspecies of composition known before, and he has added new ones;
and if we except the highest lyric, (in which how few, how very
few even of the greatest minds have been fortunate,) he has at-
tempted every species successfully; from the political song of the
day, thrown off in the playful overflow of honest joy and patriotic
exultation, to the wild ballad; * from epistolary ease and graceful
narrative, to austere and impetuous moral declamation; from the
pastoral claims and wild streaming lights of the "Thalaba," in
which sentiment and imagery have given permanence even to the
excitement of curiosity; and from the full blaze of the" Kehama,"
(a gallery of finished pictures in one splendidjkncy piece, in which,
notwithstanding the moral grandeur rises gradually above the bril-
liance of the colouring, and the boldness and novelty of the ma-
chinery,) to the more sober beauties of the "Madoc ;" and, lastly,
from the Madoc to his " Roderick," in which, retaining all his former
excellences of a poet eminently inventive and picturesque, he has
surpassed himself in language.and metre, in the construction of the
whole, and in the splendour of particular passages.
Here, then, shall I conclude? No! The characters of the de-
ceased, like the encomia on tombstones, as they are described with
religious tenderness, so are they read, with allowing sympathy, in-
deed, but yet with rational deduction. There are men who deserve
a higher record; men with whose characters it is the interest of
their contemporaries, no less than that of posterity, to be made ac-
quainted; while it is yet possible for impartial censure, and even
for quick-sighted envy, to cross-examine the tale without offence to
the courtesies of humanity; and while the eulogist, detected in
exaggeration or falsehood, must pay the full penalty of his base-
ness in the contempt which brands the convicted flatterer. Public-
ly has Mr. Southey been reviled by men, who (I would fain hope
for the honour of human nature) hurled fire-brands against a figure
* See the incomparable "Return from Moscow," and the "Old Woman of
•

<page 47>
46 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
of their own imagination; publicly have his talents been deprecia-
ted, his principles denounced; as publicly do I, therefore, who have
known him intimately, deem it my duty to leave recorded, that it is
Southey's almost unexampled felicity to possess the best gifts of
talent and genius free from all their characteristic defects. To
those who remember the state of our public schools and universi-
ties some twenty years past, it will appear no ordinary praise in any
man to have passed from innocence into virtue, not only free from
all vicious habit, but unstained by one act of intemperance, or the
degradations akin to intemperance. That scheme of head, heart,
and habitual demeanour, which, in his early manhood and first con-
troversial writings, Milton, claiming the privilege of self-defence,
asserts of himself, and challenges his calumniators to disprove;
this will his school-mates, his fellow collegians, and his maturer
friends, with a confidence proportioned to the intimacy of their
knowledge, bear witness to, as again realized in the life of Robert
Southey. But still more striking to those who, by biography, or by
their own experience, are familiar with the general habits of indus-
try and perseverance in his pursuits; the worthiness and dignity of
those pursuits; his generous submission to tasks of transitory in-
terest, or such as his genius alone could make otherwise ; and that,
having thus more than satisfied the claims of affection or prudence,
he should yet have made for himself time and power to achieve
more, and in more various departments, than almost any other wri-
ter has done, though employed wholly on subjects of his own choice
and ambition. But as Southey possesses, and is not possessed by,
his genius, even so is he the master even of his virtues. The reg-
ular and methodical tenor of his daily labours, which would be
deemed rare in the most mechanical pursuits, and might be envied
by the mere man of business, loses all semblance of formality in
the dignified simplicity of his manners, in the spring and healthful
cheerfulness of his spirits. Always employed, his friends find him
always at leisure. No less punctual in trifles, than steadfast in the
performance of highest duties, he inflicts none of those small pains
and discomforts which irregular men scatter about them, and which
in the aggregate, so often become formidable obstacles both to
happiness and utility: while, on the contrary, he bestows all the
pleasures, and inspires all that ease of mind on those around him,
or connected with him, which perfect consistency, and (if such a


<page 48>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 47
word might be framed) absolute reliability, equally in small as in
great concerns, cannot but inspire and bestow: when this, too, is
softened without being weakened by kindness and gentleness. I
know few men who so well deserve the character which an ancient
attributes to Marcus Cato, namely, that he was likest virtue, inas-
much as he seemed to act aright, not in obedience to any law or
outward motive, but by the necessity of a happy nature, which could
not act otherwise. As son, brother, husband, father, master, friend?
he-moves with firm, yet light steps, alike unostentatious, and alike
exemplary. As a writer, he has uniformly made his talents sub-
servient to the best interests of humanity, of public virtue, and do-
mestic piety; his cause has ever been the cause of pure religion
and of liberty, of national independence, and of national illumina-
tion. When future critics shall weigh out his guerdon of praise
and censure, it will be'Southey the poet only, that will supply-them
with the scanty materials for the latter. They will likewise not fail
to record, that as no man was ever a more constant friend, never
had poet more friends and honourers among the good of all parties;
and that quacks in education, quacks in politics, and quacks in crit-
icism, were his only enemies.*
.4 '. ™ '^* It is not easy to estimate the effects which the example of a young man, as
highly distinguished for strict purity of disposition and conduct as for intellectual
power and literary acquirements, may produce on those of the same age with bim-
self,-especially on those of similar pursuits and congenial minds. For many years,
my opportunities of intercourse with Mr. Southey have been rare, and at long in-
tervals; but I dwell with unabated pleasure on the strong and sudden, yet, I trust,
not fleeting, influence, which my moral being■ undefwent on my acquaintance
with him at Oxford, whither I had gone at the commencement of our Cambridge
vacation on a visit to an old school-fellow. Not, indeed, on my moral or religious
principles, for Hiey had never been contaminated; but in awakening the sense of
the duty and"dignity of making my actions accord with those principles both in
word and deed. The irregularities only not universal among the young men of
my standing, which I always knew to be wrong, I then learnt to feel as degrading;
learnt to know that an opposite conduct, which was at that time considered by
us as the easy virtue of cold and selfish prudence, might originate in the noblest
emotions, in views the most disinterested and imaginative. It is not, however,
from grateful recollections only, that I have been impelled thus to leave these,
my deliberate sentiments, on record; but, in some sense, as a debt of justice to
the man whose name has been so often connected with mine, for evil to which he
is a stranger. As a specimen, I subjoin part of a note, from "the Beauties of
the Anti-Jacobin," in which, having previously informed the public that I had
been dishonored at Cambridge for preaching deism, at a time when, for my youth-
ful ardor in defence of Christianity, I was decried as a bigot by the proselytes of
the French Phi- (or to speak more truly, Psi-) losophy, the writer concludes with
these words: "Since this time he has left his native country, commenced citi-
zen of. the wor\i,:left his poor children fatherless, and his wife destitute.^ Ex his
disce, his friends. Lamb and Southey. With severest truth it may be asserted,
that it would not be easy to select two men more exemplary in their domestic affec-
tions than those whose names were thus printed at full length as in the same rank
of morals with a denounced infidel and fugitive, and who had left his children
fatherless, and his wife destitute! Is it surprising, that many good men remained
longer than, perhaps, they otherwise would have done, adverse to a party which
encouraged and openly rewarded the authors of such atrocious calumnies? Quali*
es, nescio; sed per quales agis, scio et doleo.

<page 49>
CHAPTER IV.
The Lyrical Ballads with the preface—Mr. Wordsworth's earlier poems—Oil
fancy and imagination—The investigation of the distinction important to the fine arts.
I have wandered far from the object in view, but as I fancied to
myself readers who would respect the feelings that had tempted me
from the main road, so I dare calculate on not a few who will warm-
ly sympathise with them. At present it will be sufficient for my
purpose, if I have proved, that Mr. Southey's writings, no more
than my own, furnished the original occasion to this fiction of a
new school of poetry, and of clamours against its supposed found-
ers and proselytes. ■'
As little do I-believe that " Mr. Wordsworth's Lyrical Ballads"
were in themselves the cause. I speak exclusively of the two vol-
umes so entitled. A careful and repeated examination of these,
confirms me in the belief, that the omission of less than an hundred
lines would have precluded nine tenths of thecriticsm on this work.
I hazard this declaration, however, on the supposition, that the read-
er had taken it up, as he would have done any other collection of
poems purporting to derive their subjects or interests from the inci-
dents of domestic or ordinary life, intermingled with higher strains
of meditation, which the poet utters in his own person and character;
with the proviso, that they were perused without knowledge of, or
reference to, the author's peculiar opinions, and that the reader had
not had his attention previously directed to those peculiarities. In
these, as was actually the case with Mr. Southey's earlier works, the lines and passages which might have offended the general taste,
would have been considered as mere inequalities, and attributed to
inattention, not to perversity of judgment. The men of business
who had passed their lives chiefly in cities, and who might therefore
be expected to derive the highest pleasure from acute notices of
men and manners, conveyed in easy, yet correct and pointed lan-
guage; and all those who, reading but little poetry, are most stim-
ulated with that species of it which seems most distant from prose,
would probably have passed by the volume altogether. Others
more catholic in their taste, and yet habituated to be most pleased

<page 50>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
49
when most excited, would have contented themselves with deciding,
that the author had been successful in proportion to the elevation
of his style and subject. Not a few, perhaps, might, by their ad-
miration of " the lines written near Tintern Abbey," those "left
upon a seat under a Yew Tree," the "old Cumberland beggar,"
and " Ruth," have been gradually led to peruse with kindred feeling
the " Brothers," the " Hart leap well," and whatever other poems
in that collection may be described as holding a middle place be-
tween those written in the highest and those in the humblest style;
as, for instance, between the "Tintern Abbey," and "the Thorn,"
or the "Simon Lee." Should their taste submit to no further
change, and still remain unreconciled to the colloquial phrases, or
the imitations of them, that are, more or less, scattered through the
class last mentioned; yet, even from the small number of the lat-
ter, they would have deemed them but an inconsiderable subtraction
from the merit of the whole work; or, what is sometimes not un-
pleasing in the publication of a new writer, as serving to ascertain
the natural tendency, and, consequently, the proper direction of the
author's genius.
In the critical remarks, therefore, prefixed and annexed to the
"Lyrical Ballads," I believe, that we may safely rest, as the true
origin of the unexampled opposition which Mr. Wordsworth's wri-
tings have been since doomed to encounter. The humbler passages
in the poems themselves, were dwelt on and cited to justify the re-
jection of the theory. What in and for themselves would have
been either forgotten or forgiven as imperfections, or at least com-
parative failures, provoked direct hostility when announced as inten-
tional, as the result of choice after full deliberation. Thus the po-
ems, admitted by all as excellent, joined with those which had pleas-
ed the far greater number, though they formed two-thirds of the
whole work, instead of being deemed (as in all right they should
have been, even if we take for granted that the reader judged aright)
an atonement for the few exceptions, gave wind and fuel to the an-
imosity against both the poems and the poet. In all perplexity
there is a portion of fear, which predisposes the mind to anger.
Not able to deny that the author possessed both genius and a pow-
erful intellect, they felt very positive, but were not quite certain, that
he might not be in the right, and they themselves in the wrong; an un-
quiet state of mind, which seeks alleviation by quarrelling with the «■-■

<page 51>
50 BIOGRAPHIA LITERAR1A.
occasion of it, and by wondering at the perverseness of the man who
had written a long and argumentative essay to persuade them, that
"Fair is foul, and foul is fair;"
in other words, that they had been all their lives admiring without
judgment, and were now about to censure without reason.*
That this conjecture is not wide from the mark, I am induced to
believe from the noticeable fact, which I can state on my own
knowledge, that the same general censure should have been ground-
ed almost by each different person on some different poem. Among
those, whose candour and judgment I estimate highly, I distinctly
remember six who expressed their objections to the " Lyrical Bal-
lads," almost in the same words, and altogether to the same pur-
port, at the same time admitting, that several of the poems had giv-
en them great pleasure; and, strange as it might seem, the compo-
sition which one had cited as execrable, another had quoted as his
favourite. I am indeed convinced, in my own mind, that could the
same experiment have been tried with these volumes as was made
in the well-known story of the picture, the result would have been
the same; the parts which had been covered by the number of the
* In opinions of long continuance, and in which we had never before been mo-
lested by a single doubt, to be suddenly convinced of an error, is almost like be-
ing convicted of a fault. There is a state of mind, which is the direct antithesis
of that which takes place when we make a bull. The bull, namely, consists in
the bringing together two incompatible thoughts, with the sensation, but without
the sense of their connexion. The psychological condition, or that which con-
stitutes the possibility of this state, being such disproportionate vividness of two
distant thoughts, as extinguishes or obscures the consciousness of the intermedi-
ate images or conceptions, or wholly abstracts the attention from them. Thus in
the well known bull, "I was a fine child, but they changed me /" the first conception
expressed in the word "/," is that of personal identity—.Eg"*? contemplans; the
second expressed in the word "me," is the visual image or object by which the
mind represents to itself its past condition, or rather, its personal identity under
the form in which it imagined itself previously to have existed—Ego contempla-
tes. Now, the change of one visual image for another involves in itself no ab-
surdity, and becomes absurd only by its immediate juxta-position with the first
thought, which is rendered possible by the whole attention being successively
"me" being sometimes equivalent, and sometimes having a distinct meaning;
sometimes, namely, signifying the act of self-consciousness, sometimes the exter-.nal image in and by which the mind represents that act to itself, the result and
symbol of its individuality. Now, suppose the direct contrary state, and you will
have a distinct sense of the connection between two conceptions, without that
sensation of such connexion which is supplied by habit. The man feels, as if he
were standing on his head, though he cannot but see, that he is truly standing on
bis feet. This, as a painful sensation, will of course have a tendency to associ-
ate itself with the person who occasions it; even as persons, who have been by
painful means restored from derangement, are known to feel an involuntary dislike
towards their physician.

<page 52>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 51
-Mack spots on the one day, would be found equally albo lapide no-
tatae on the succeeding.
However this may be, it is assuredly hard and unjust to"fix the
attention on a few separate and insulated poems, with as much aver-
sion as if they had been so many plague-spots on the whole work,
instead of passing them over in silence, as so much blank paper,
or leaves of bookseller's catalogue; especially, as no one pretends
to have found immorality or indelicacy; and the poems, therefore,
at the worst, could only be regarded as so many light or inferior
coins in a roleau of gold, not as so much alloy in a weight of bull-
ion. A friend whose talents I hold in the highest respect, but whose
judgment and strong sound sense I have had almost continued oc-
casion to revere, making the usual complaints to me concerning both
the style and subjects of Mr. Wordsworth's minor poems; I ad-
mitted that there were some few tales and incidents, in which I
could not myself find a sufficient cause for their having been record-
ed in metre. I mentioned " Alice Fell" as an instance; "nay,"
replied my friend, with more than usual quickness of manner, " I
cannot agree with you there! that I own does seem to me a remark-
ably pleasing poem." In the " Lyrical Ballads," (for my experi-
ence does not enable me to extend the remark equally unqualified
to the two subsequent volumes) I have heard, at different times, and
from different individuals, every single poem extolled and reprobated,
with the exception of those of loftier kind, which, as was before ob-
served, seem to have won universal praise. This fact of itself
would have made me diffident in my censures, had not a still stron-
ger ground been furnished by the strange contrast of the heat and
long continuance of the opposition, with the nature of the faults
stated as justifying it. The seductive faults, the dulcia vitia of
Cowley, Marini, or Darwin, might reasonably be thought capable of
corrupting the public judgment for half a century, and require a
twenty years' war, campaign after campaign, in order to dethrone
the usurper, and re-establish the legitimate taste. But that a down-
right simpleness, under the affectation of simplicity, prosaic words
in feeble metre, silly thoughts in childish phrases, and a preference
of mean, degrading, or, at best, trivial associations and characters,
should succeed in forming a school of imitators, a company of al-
most religious admirers, and this among young men of ardent minds,
liberal education, and not
"With academic laurels unbestowed;"

<page 53>
52 BIOGRAPHIA UTERAIHA.

and that this bare and bald counterfeit of poetry, which is charac-
terised as below criticism, should, for nearly twenty years, have well
nigh engrossed criticism as the main, if not the only, butt of review,
magazine, pamphlets, poem, and paragraph ;—this is, indeed, mat-
ter of wonder! Of yet greater is it, that the contest should still
continue as * undecided as that between Bacchus and the frogs in
Aristophanes; when the former descended to the realms of the de-
parted to bring back the spirit of old and genuine poesy.
Xopog Ba<rpa)fwv; Aiovujoj.
^x. /apSxsxsxsg, xoag, xoag.
A. dXX' sgoXoifS' auVcj xoaj;.
. - otiSev yap eg' aXX' -JJ xoag.
Of[iw£W • ou yap (t.ai fjiXsi.
X. aXXa jjwjv XExpagoijoscSa
y', o»ojov i] pajuyg au »juv
)^av3avrj 8} i])j,i8a.g,
/3jsxsxsxsg, xoaf, xoag.
A.
X.
A.
Tourw yap ou vix^jete.
oui5e pjv jjftas gu ffavruj.
-
ou<Se fA^v ufjoEij ys (5»j (jl'
ouSsVors. xsx<5oig"ou,ai yap,
xav fis 5s»j, 5/ *jjjiipaj,
swj av CfAwv sVixpaT^jw <rou xoag.
X. /3p£xsxsxs|, KOAH, KOAS!
* Without, however, the apprehensions attributed to the Pagan reformer of the
poetic republic. If we may judge from the preface to the recent collection of his
poems, Mr. W. would have answered with Xanthias—"
2u 8' xx sSsigag tov .^oipov ruv 'p*i(j,arwv,
Kai rag a#siXaj; HAN. sfxa Ai', so' Eippovrifa.
And here let me dare hint to the authors of the numerous parodies and pretended
imitations of Mr. Wordsworth's style, that, at once to convey wit and wisdom in
the semblance of folly and dulness, as is done in the clowns and fools, nay, even
in the Dogberry, of our Shakspeare, is, doubtless, a proof of genius; or, at all
events, of satiric talent; but that the attempt to ridicule a silly and childish poem,
by writing another still sillier and still more childish, can only prove, (if it prove
any thing at all,) that the parodist is a still greater blockhead than the original
writer, and, what is far worse, a malignant coxcomb to boot. The talent for mim-
cry seems strongest where the human race are most degraded. The poor, naked,

<page 54>

BIOGRAPIIU LITERAUIA.
53
During the last year of my residence at Cambridge, I became
acquainted with Mr. Wordsworth's first publications, entitled " De-
scriptive Sketches;" and seldom, if ever, was the emergence of
an original poetic genius above the literary horizon more evidently
announced. In the form, style/and manner of the whole poem,
and in the structure of the particular lines and periods, there is an
harshness and an acerbity connected and combined with words and
images all a-glow, which might recall those products of the vegeta-
ble world, where gorgeous blossoms rise out of the hard and thorny
rind and shell, within which the rich fruit was elaborating. The
language was not only peculiar and strong, but at times knotty and
contorted, as by its own impatient strength; while the novelty and
struggling crowd of images, acting in conjunction with the difficul-
ties of the style, demanded always a greater closeness of attention
than poetry, (at all events, than descriptive poetry,) has a right to
claim. It not seldom, therefore, justified the complaint of obscu-
rity. In the following extract I have sometimes fancied that I saw
an emblem of the poem itself, and of the author's genius as it was
then displayed.
"'Tis storm; and hid in mist from hour to hour,
All day the floods a deepening murmur pour;
The sky is veiled, and every cheerful sight; . —Dark is the region as with coming night;
And yet what frequent bursts of overpowering light;
Triumphant on the bosom of the storm,
Glances the fire-clad eagle's wheeling form;
Eastward, in long perspective glittering, shine
The wood-crowned cliffs that o'er the lake recline;
Wide o'er the Alps a hundred streams unfold,
At once to pillars turn'd that flame with gold;
Behind his sail the peasant strives to shun
The West, that burns like one dilated sun,
Where in a mighty crucible expire
The mountains, glowing hot, like coals of fire."
The poetic Psyche, in its process to full development, undergoes
as many changes as its Greek name-sake, the butterfly.* And it
half human savages of New Holland, were found excellent mimics ; and in civil-
ized society, minds of the very lowest stamp alone satirize by copying. At least
the difference, which must blend with, and balance the likeness, in order to con-
stitute a just imitation, existing here merely in caricature, detracts from the libel-
ler's heart, without adding an iota to the credit of his understanding.
* The fact that in Greek, Psyche is the common name for the soul, and the but-
terfly, is thus alluded to in the following stanza from an unpublished poem of the
author:

<page 55>
54 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
is remarkable how soon genius clears and purifies itself from the
faults and errors of its earliest products; faults which, in its earli-
est compositions, are the more obtrusive and confluent; because,
as heterogeneous elements which had only a temporary use, they
constitute the very ferment by which themselves are carried off. Or
we may compare them to some diseases, which must work on the
humours, and be thrown out on the surface, in order to secure the
patient from their future recurrence. I was in my twenty-fourth
year when I had the happiness of knowing Mr. Wordsworth person-
ally,-and while memory lasts, I shall hardly forget the sudden effect
produced on my mind, by his recitation of a manuscript poem, which
still remains unpublished, but of which the stanza, and tone of style,
were the same as those of the " Female Vagrant," as originally
printed in the first volume of the " Lyrical Ballads." There was
here no mark of strained thought or forced diction, no crowd ortur-
bulence of imagery; and as the poet hath himself well described
in his, lines " on revisiting the Wye," manly reflection, and human
associations, had given both variety and an additional interest to
natural objects, which, in the passion and appetite of the first love,
they had seemed to him neither to need or permit. The occasional
obscurities which had risen from an imperfect controul over the re-
sources of his native language, had almost wholly disappeared, to-
gether with that worse defect of arbitrary and illogical phrases, at
once hackneyed and fantastic, which holds so distinguished a place
in the technique of ordinary poetry, and will, more or less, alloy the
earlier poems of the truest genius, unless the attention has been
specifically directed to their worthlessness and incongruity.* I
"The butterfly the ancient Grecians made
The soul's fair emblem, and its only name—
But of the soul, escaped the slavish trade
Of mortal life! For in this earthly frame
Our's is the reptile's lot, much toil, much blame,
Manifold motions making little speed,
And to deform and kill the things whereon we feed." S. T. C.
* Mr. Wordsworth, even in his two earliest, " the Evening Walk," and "the De-
scriptive Sketches," is more free from this latter defect than most of the young
Eoets, his contemporaries. It may, however, be exemplified—together with the
arsh and obscure construction, in which he more often offended—in the follow-
ing lines:
"'Mid stormy vapours ever driving.by,
Where ospreys, cormorants, and herons cry;

<page 56>

BIOGBAPHIA LITERARIA. 55
did not perceive any thing particular in the mere style of the poem
alluded to during its recitation, except, indeed, such difference as
was not separable from the thought and manner; and the Spence-
rian stanza, which always, more or less, recalls to the reader's mind
Spencer's own style, would doubtless have authorized, in my then
opinion, a more frequent descent to the phrases of ordinary life than
could, without an ill effect, have been hazarded in the heroic coup-
let. It was not, however, the freedom from false taste, whether
as to common defects, or to those more properly his own, which
made so unusual an impression on my feelings immediately, and
subsequently on my judgment. It was the union of deep feeling
with profound thought; the fine balance of truth in observing, with
the imaginative faculty in modifying the objects observed; and above all, the original gift of spreading the tone, the atmosphere,
and, with it, the depth and height of the ideal world around forms,
incidents, and situations, of which, for the common view, custom
had bedimmed all the lustre, had dried up the sparkle and the dew
drops. "To find no contradiction in the union of old and new; to contemplate the Ancient of days and all his works with feelings as fresh as if all had then sprang forth at the first creative fiat; char- I vacterizes the mind that feels the riddle of the world, and may help to unravel it. To carry on the feelings of childhood into the pow-
ers of manhood; to combine the child's sense of wonder and nov-
elty with the appearances which every day, for, perhaps, forty years,
had rendered familiar;
"With sun and moon and stars throughout the year,
And man and woman;"
this is the character and privilege of genius, and one of the marks
which distinguish genius from talents. And therefore, it is the prime
merit of genius, and its most unequivocal mode of manifestation,
Where hardly given the hopeless waste to cheer,
Denied the bread of life the foodful ear,
Dwindles the pear on autumn's latest spray,
And apple sickens pale in summer's ray;
E'en here content has fixed her smiling reigu
With independence, child of high disdain."
I hope I need not say, that I have quoted these lines for no other purpose than to
make my meaning fully understood. It is to be regretted that Mr. Wordsworth
has not re-published these two poems entire.

<page 57>
56 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
J
so to represent familiar objects as to awaken in the minds of others
a kindred feeling concerning them, and that freshness of sensation
which is the constant accompaniment of mental, no less than of
bodily convalescence. Who has not a thousand times seen snow
fall on water? Who has not watched it with a new feeling from the
time that he has read Burns' comparison of sensual pleasure,.
".To snow that falls upon a river,
A moment white—then gone forever!"
"In poems, equally as in philosophic disquisitions, genius pro-
duces the strongest impressions of novelty, while it rescues the
most admitted truths from the impotence caused by the very
circumstance of their universal admission. Truths, of all others
the most awful and mysterious, yet being, at the same time, of uni-
versal interest, are too often considered as so true, that they lose all
the life and efficiency of truth, and lie bed-ridden in the dormitory
of the soul, side by side with the most despised and exploded er-
rors." The Friend,* page 76. No. 5.
This excellence, which, in all Mr. Wordsworth's writings, is more
or less predominant, and which constitutes the character of his mind, I no sooner felt than I sought to understand. Repeated me-
ditations led me first to suspect, (and a more intimate analysis of the
human faculties, their appropriate marks, functions and effects, ma-
tured my conjecture into full conviction,) that fancy and imagination
were two distinct and widely different faculties, instead of being, ac-
cording to the general belief, either two names with one meaning, or,
at furthest, the lower and higher degree of one and the same power.
It is not, I own, easy to conceive a more opposite translation of the
Greek phantasia than the Latin imaginatio: but it is equally true,
that in all societies there exists an instinct of growth, a certain col-
lective, unconscious good sense, working progressively to desy-
nonymise f those words, originally of the same meaning, which the
* As "The Friend" was printed on stampt sheets, and sent only by the post, to
a very limited number of subscribers, the author has felt less objection to quote
from it, though a work of his own. To the public at large, indeed, it is the same
as a volume in manuscript.
t This is effected either by giving to the one word a general, and to the other
an exclusive use; as, "to put on the back," and "to endorse:" or, by an actual
distinction of meanings, as "naturalist," and "physician;" or, by difference of re-
lation, as "I," and "me;" (each of which the rustics of our different provinces
still use in all the cases singular of the first personal pronoun.) Even the mere
difference, or corruption, in the pronunciation of the same word, if it have become

<page 58>
BIOGKAPHIA LITERARIA. 57
conflux of dialects had supplied to the more homogeneous languages,
as the Greek and German: and which the same cause, joined with
accidents of translation from original works of different countries,
occasion in mixed languages like our own. The first and most important point to be proved, is, that two conceptions perfectly distinct are confused under one and the same word, and, (this done,)
to appropriate that word exclusively to one meaning, and the sy-
nonyme, (should there be one,) to the other. But if (as will be of-
ten the case in the arts and sciences,) no synonyme exists, we must
either invent or borrow a word. In the present instance, the appropriation had already begun, and been legitimated in the derivative
adjective: Milton had a highly imaginative, Cowley a very fanciful
mind. If, therefore, I should succeed in establishing the actual
existences of two faculties generally different, the nomenclature
would be at once determined. To the faculty by which I had char-
acterized Milton, we should confine the term imagination; while
the other would be contra-distinguished as fancy. Now, were it
once fully ascertained, (hat this division is no less grounded in na-
ture than that of delirium from mania, or Otway's
"Lutes, lobsters, seas of milk, and ships of amber,"
from Sbakspeare's .
ifWhat, have his daughters brought him to this pass?
or from the preceding apostrophe to the elements; the theory of
the fine arts, and of poetry in particular, could not, I thought, but
derive some additional and important light. It would, in its imme-
diate effects, furnish a torch of guidance to the philosophical critic;
and, ultimately, to the poet himself. In energetic minds, truth soon
general, will produce a new word with a distinct signification; thus, "property,"
and "propriety," the latter of which, even to the time of Charles II. was the
written word for all the senses of both. Thus, too, "mister," and "master," both
hasty pronunciations of the same word; "magister," "mistress," and "miss,"
"if,"^and "give,*' &c. &c. There is a sort of minim immortal among the animal- cula infusoria, which has not, naturally, either birth or death, absolute beginning
or absolute end; for, at a certain period, a small point appears on its back, which
deepens and lengthens till the creature divides into two, and the same process
recommences in each of the halves now become integral. This may be a fanciful,
but it is by no means a bad emblem of the formation of words, and may facilitate
the conception, how immense a nomenclature may be organized from a few sim-
ple sounds by rational beings in a social state. For each new application or ex-
citement of the same sound will call forth a different sensation, which cannot but
affect the pronunciation. The after recollection of the sound, without the same
vivid sensation, will modify it still further; till, at length, all trace of the original
likeness is worn away.

<page 59>
58 fcldGRAPHlA LtTEIUIlIA.
changes, by domestication, into power; and from directing in the
discrimination and appraisal of the product, becomes influencive in
the production. To admire on principle, is the only way to imitate
without loss of originality.
It has been already hinted, that metaphysics and psychology
have long been my hobby-horse. But to have a hobby-horse, and
be vain of it, are so commonly found together, that they pass al-
most for the same. I trust, therefore, that there will be more good
humour than contempt, in the smile with which the reader chastises
my self-complacency, if I confess myself uncertain, whether the
satisfaction from the perception of a truth new to myself, may not
have been rendered more poignant, by the conceit that it would be
equally so to the public. There was a time, certainly, in which I
took some little credit to myself, in the belief athat I had been the
first of my countrymen who had pointed out the diverse meaning
of which the two terms were capable, and analyzed the faculties to
which they should be appropriated. Mr. W. Taylor's recent vol-
umes of synonymes, I have not yet seen ;* but bis specification
of the terms in question, has been clearly shown to be both insuffi-
cient and erroneous by Mr. Wordsworth, in the preface added to
e
* I ought to have added, with the exception of a single sheet which I acciden-
tally met with at the printer's. Even from this scanty specimen, I found it impossible to doubt the talent, or not to admire the ingenuity of the author. That
his distinctions were, for the greater part, unsatisfactory to my mind, proves
nothing against their accuracy; but it may possibly be serviceable to him in case
of a second edition, if I take this opportunity of suggesting the query, whether
he may not have been occasionally misled, by having assumed, as to me he appear-
ed to have done, the non-existence of any absolute synonymes in our language?
Now, I cannot but think, that there are many which remain for our posterity to
distinguish and appropriate, and which I regard as so much reversionary wealth
in our mother tongue. When two distinct meanings are confounded under one or
more words, (and such must be the case, as sure as our knowledge is progressive,
and, of course, imperfect) erroneous consequences will be drawn, and what is
true in one sense of the word, will be affirmed as true in toto. Men of research,
startled by the consequences, seek in the things themselves (whether in or out of
the mind) for a knowledge of the fact, and having discovered the difference, re-
move the equivocation either by the substitution of a new word, or by the ap-
propriation of one of the two or more words, that had before been used promis-
cuously. When this distinction has been so naturalized and of such general cur-
rency that the language itself does, as it were, think for us, (like the sliding rule
which is the mechanic's safe substitute for arithmetical knowledge,) we then say,
that it is evident to common sense. Common sense, therefore, differs indifferent
ages. What was born and christened in the schools, passess by degrees into the
world at large, and becomes the property of the market and the tea-table. At
least, I can discover no other meaning of the term common sense, if it is to convey
any specific difference from sense and jugment in genere, and where it is not
used scholastically for the universal reason. Thus, in the reign of Charles II., the
philosophic world was called to arms by the moral sophisms of Hobbs, and the
ablest writers exerted themselves in the detection of an error which a school-boy
would now be able to confute by the mere recollection, that compulsion and
obligation conveyed two ideas perfectly disparate, and that what appertained to
the one had been falsely transferred to the other, by a mere confusion of terms.

<page 60>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 59
the late collection of his "Lyrical Ballads and other poems." The explanation which Mr. Wordsworth has himself given, will be
found to differ from mine, chiefly, perhaps, as our objects are dif-
ferent. It could scarcely, indeed, happen otherwise, from the ad-
vantage I have enjoyed of frequent conversation with him on a
subject to which a poem of his own first directed my attention, and
my conclusions concerning which, he had made more lucid to my-
self by many happy instances-drawn from the operation of natural
objects on the mind. But it was Mr. Wordsworth's purpose to
consider the influences of fancy and imagination as they are mani-
fested in poetry, and, from the different effects, to conclude their
diversity in kind; while it is my object to investigate the seminal
principle, and then, from the kind, to deduce the degree. My
friend has drawn a masterly sketch of the branches, with their poetic
fruitage. I wish^o add the trunk, and even the roots, as far as
they lift themselves above ground, and are visible to the naked eye
of our common consciousness. ..
Yet, even in this attempt, I am aware that I shall be obliged to
draw more largely on the reader's attention, than so immethodical
a miscellany can authorize; when in such a work (the Ecclesiastical
Policy) of such a mind as Hooker's, the judicious author, though
no less admirable for the perspicuity than for the port and dignity
of his language; and though he wrote for men of learning in a
learned age, saw, nevertheless, occasion to anticipate and guard
against" complaints of obscurity," as often as he was to trace his
subject " to the highest well-spring and fountain." Which, (con-
tinues he,) "because men are not accustomed to, the pains we take
are more needful, a great deal, than acceptable; and the matters
we handle seem, by reason of newness, (till the mind grow better
acquainted with them,) dark and intricate." I would gladly, there-
fore, spare both myself and others this labour, if I knew how with-
out it to present an intelligible statement of my poetic creed ; not
as my opinions, which weigh for nothing, but as deductions from
established premises, conveyed in such a form as is calculated
either to effect a fundamental conviction, or to receive a funda-
mental confutation. If I may dare once more adopt the words of
Hooker, "they, unto whom we shall seem tedious, are in no wise
injured by us, because it is in their own hands to spare that labour,
which they are not willing to endure." Those at least, let me be

<page 61>
60 BIOGRAPHIA LITEKARIA.
permitted to add, who have taken so much pains to render me
ridiculous for a perversion of taste, and have supported the charge
by attributing -strange notions to me on no other authority than their
own conjectures, owe it to themselves, as well as to me, not to re-
fuse their attention to my own statement of the theory, which I do
acknowledge; or shrink from the trouble of examining the grounds
on which I rest it, or the arguments which I offer in its justification.
. • ■- -

<page 62>
J
CHAPTER V.
On the law of association—Its history traced from Aristotle to Hartley.
There have been men in all ages, who have been impelled, as
by an instinct, to propose their own-nature as a problem, and who
devote their attempts to its solution. The first step was to con-
struct a table of distinctions, which they seem to have formed on
the principle of the absence or presence of the will. Our various
sensations, perceptions and movements, were classed as active or
passive, or as media partaking of both. A still finer distinction
was soon established between the voluntary and the spontaneous. In our perceptions we seem to ourselves merely passive to an ex-
ternal power, whether as a mirror reflecting the landscape, or as a
blank canvas on which some unknown hand paints it. For it is worthy of notice, that the latter, or the system of idealism, may be
traced to sources equally remote with the former, or materialism;
and Berkeley can boast an ancestry at least as venerable as Gas-
sendi or Hobbs. These conjectures, however, concerning the mode in which our perceptions originated, could not alter the natu-
ral difference in things and thoughts. In the former, the cause
appeared wholly external; while in the latter, sometimes our will interfered as the producing or determining cause, and sometimes ,t ,our nature seemed to act by a mechanism of its own, without any ffl
Conscious effort of the will, or even against it. Our inward expe-
riences were thus arranged in three separate classes, the passive
sense, or what the school-men call the merely receptive quality of the mind; the voluntary; and the spontaneous, which holds the middle place between both. But it is not in human nature to meditate on any mode of action, without inquiring after the law that
governs it; and in the explanation of the spontaneous movements
of our being, the metaphysician took the lead of the anatomist and
natural philosopher. In Egypt, Palestine, Greece, and India, the
analysis of the mind had reached its noon and manhood, while ex-
perimental research was still in its dawn and infancy. For many,
very many centuries, it has been difficult to advance a new truth, or even a new error, in the philosophy of the intellect or morals.


<page 63>
62 B10GRAPHIA LITBKARtA.
With regard, however, to the laws that direct the spontaneous
movements of thought, and the principle of their intellectual me-
chanism, there exists, it has been asserted, an important excep-
tion, most honourable to the moderns, and in the merit of which our
own country claims the largest share. Sir JamesJMackijltosh
(who, amid the variety of his talents and attainments, is not of less
repute for the depth and accuracy of his philosophical inquiries,
than for the eloquence with which he is said to render their most
difficult results perspicuous, and the driest attractive,) affirmed, in
the lectures delivered by him at Lincoln's Inn Hall, that the law of
association, as established in the contemporaneity of the original
impressions, formed the basis of all true psychology; and any
ontological or metaphysical science, not contained in such (i. e.
empirical) psychology, was but a web of abstractions and generali-
zations. Of this prolific truth, of this great fundamental law, he
declared HoBBsto have been the original discoverer, while its full ap-
plication to the whole intellectual system we owe to David Hartley;
who stood in the same relation to Hobbs, as Newton to Kepler \
the law of association being that to the mind, which gravitation is
to matter. - ,
Of the former clause in this assertion, as it respects the compara-
tive merits of the ancient metaphysicians, including their commen-
tators, the school men, and of the modern French and British phi-
losophers, from Hobbs to Hume, Hartley and Condillac, this is
not the place to speak. So wide indeed is the chasm between this
gentleman's philosophical creed and mine, that so far from being able
to join hands, we could scarce make our voices intelligible to each
other :and to bridge it over, would require more time, skill and power,
than I believe myself to possess. But the latter clause involves
for the greater part a mere question of fact and history, and the ac-
curacy of the statement is to be tried by documents rather than
reasoning. »
First, then, I deny Hobbs's claim in toto: for he had been antici-
pated by Des Cartes, whose work "De Methodo" preceded
Hobbs's " De Natura Humana," by more than a year. But what
is of much more importance, Hobbs builds nothing on the principle
which he had announced. He does not even announce it, as differ-
ing in any respect from the general laws of material motion and
impact: nor was it, indeed, possible for him so to do, compatibly

<page 64>
BIOGRAfHIA LITERARIA. 63
with his system, which was exclusively material and mechanical.
Far otherwise is it with Des Cartes; greatly as he too, in his after
writings, (and still more egregiously his followers, De la Forge,
and others,) obscured the truth by their attempts to explain it on the theory of nervous fluids and material configurations. But in
his interesting work "De Methodo," "Des Cartes relates the cir-
cumstance which first led him to meditate on this subject, and which
since then has been often noticed and employed as an instance and
illustration of the law. A child who, with its eyes bandaged, had
lost several of his fingers by amputation, continued to complain
for many days successively of pains, now in his joint, and now in
that of the very fingers which had been cut off. Des Cartes was
led by this incident to reflect on the uncertainty with which we at-
tribute any particular place to any inward pain or uneasiness, and
proceeded, after long consideration, to establish it as a general law,
that contemporaneous impressions, whether images or sensations,
recal each other mechanically. On this principle, as a ground
work, he built up the whole system of human language, as one
continued process of association. He showed in what sense not only general terms, but generic images, (under the name of abstract
ideas,) actually existed, and in what consists their nature and
power. As one word may become the general exponent of many,
so, by association, a simple image may represent a whole class.
But in truth, Hobbs himself makes no claims to any discovery, and
introduces this^law of association, or, (in his own language,) dis-
cursus mentalis, as an admitted fact, in the solution alone of which
it is, by causes purely physiological, he arrogates any originality.
His system is briefly this: whenever the senses are impinged on
by external objects, whether by the rays of light reflected from
them, or by effluxes of their finer particles, there results a corres-
pondent motion of the innermost and subtlest organs. This mo-
tion constitutes a representation, and there remains an impression
of the same, or a certain disposition to repeat the same motion.
Whenever we feel several objects at the same time,the impressions
that are left (or, in the language of Mr. Hume, the ideas) are linked
together. Whenever, therefore, any one of the movements which
constitute a complex impression, are renewed through the senses,
the others succeed mechanically. It follows of necessity, there-
fore, that Hobbs, as well as Hartley, and all others who derive as-.

<page 65>
64 BIOGEAPHIA LITERARIA.
sociation from the connexion and interdependence of the supposed
matter, the movements of which constitute our thoughts, must have
reduced all its forms to the one law of time. But even the merit of
announcing this law with philosophic precision cannot be fairly
conceded to him. For the objects of any two ideas * need not
have co-existed in the same sensation in order to become mutually
associable. The same result will follow, when one only of the
two ideas has been represented by the senses, and the other by the
memory.
Long, however, before either Hobbs or Des Cartes, the law of
association had been defined, and its important functions set forth
by Melanchthon, Ammerbach, and Ludovicus Vives ; more especially by the last. Phantasia, it is to be noticed, is employed by
Vives to' express the mental power of comprehension, or the active
function of the mind ; and imaginatio for the receptivity (vis recep- tiva) of impressions, or for the passive perception. The power of
combination he appropriates to the former:—" qua? singula et
simpliciter acceperat imaginatio, ea conjungit et disgungit phantasia." And the law by which the thoughts'are spontaneously pre* I here use tBe word "idea" in Mr. Hume's sense, on account of its general
currency among the English metaphysicians, though against my own judgment;
for I believe that the vague use of this word has been the cause of much error
and more confusion. The word loia, in its original sense, as used by Pindar,
Aristophanes, and in the gospel of Matthew, represented the visual abstraction
of a distant object, when we see the whole without distinguishing its parts. Pla-
to adopted it as a technical term, and as the antithesis to EiouXcc, or sensuous
images; the transient and perishable emblems, or mental words, of ideas. The
ideas themselves he considered as mysterious powers, living, seminal, formative,
and exempt from time. In this sense the word became the property of the Platonic school; and it seldom occurs in Aristotle, without some such phrase annex-
ed to it, as according to Plato, or as Plato says. Our English writers to^the end
of Charles 2nd's reign, or somewhat later, employed it either in the original
sense, or Platonieally, or in a sense nearly correspondent to our present use of the
substantive, Ideal, always, however, opposing it, more or less, to image, whether
of present or absent objects. The reader will not be displeased with the follow-
ing interesting exemplification from bishop Jeremy Taylor: "St. Lewis the
king sent Ivo bishop of Chartres on an embassy, and he told, that he met a grave
and stately matron on the way, with a censer of fire in one hand, and a vessel of
water in the other; and observing her to have a melancholy, religious, and phan-
tastic deportment and look, he asked her what those symbols meant, and what
she meant to do with her fire and water; she answered, my purpose is with the
fire to burn paradise, and with my water to quench the flames of hell, that men
may serve God purely for the love of God. But we rarely meet with such spirits,
which love virtue so metaphysically as to abstract her from all sensible composi-
tions, and love the purity of the idea." Des Cartes having introduced into his
philosophy the fanciful hypothesis of material ideas, or certain configurations of
the brain, which were as so many moulds to the influxes of the external world;
Mr. Locke adopted the term, but extended its signification to whatever is the
immediate object of the mind's attention or consciousness. Mr. Hume, distil
guishing those representations which are accompanied with a sense of a present
object, from those reproduced by the mind itself, designated the former by im-
pressions, and confined the word idea to the latter.

<page 66>
"BIOGRAl'IlIA LITERARIA. 05
sented follows thus :—" quae simul sunt a phantasa comprehensa
si alterutrum occurrat, solet secum alterum representare." To
time, therefore, he subordinates all the other exciting causes of
association. The soul proceeds "a causa ad affectum, ab hoc ad
instrumentum, a parte ad totum;" thence to the place, from place
to person, and from this to whatever preceded or followed, all as
being parts of a total impression, each of which may recal the other.
The apparent springs "Saltus vel transitus etiam longisimos," he
explains by the same thought having been a component part of two
or more total impressions. Thus "ex Scipione venio incogitatio-
nem potential Turcica? proper victorias ejus in ea parte Asia? in
qua regnabat Antiochus."
But from Vives I pass at once to the source of his doctrines, and
(as far as we can judge from the remains yet extant of Greek phi-
losophy) as to the first, so to the fullest and most perfect enuncia-
tion of the associative principle, viz: to the writings of Aristotle;
and of these principally to the books " De Anima," " De Memoria,"
and that which is entitled in the old translations " Parva Naturalia."
In as much as later writers have either deviated from, or added to
his doctrines, they appear to me to have introduced either error or
groundless supposition.
In the first place, it is to be observed, that Aristotle's positions
on this subject are unmixed with fiction. The wise Stagyrite
speaks of no successive particles propagating motion like billiard
balls, (as Hobbs ;) nor of nervous or animal spirits, where inani-
mate and irrational solids are thawed down, and distilled, or filtrated
by ascension, into living and intelligent fluids, that etch and re-etch
engravings on the brain, (as the followers of Des Cartes, and the
humoral pathologists in general;) nor of an oscillating ether which
was to effect the same service for the nerves of the brain considered
as solid fibres, as the animal spirits perform for them under the no-
tion of hollow tubes, (as Hartley teaches)—nor finally, (with yet
more recent dreamers,) of chemical compositions by elective affini-
ty, or of an electric light at once the immediate object and the ul-
timate organ of inward vision, which rises to the brain like an Auro-
ra Borealis, and there disporting in various shapes, (as the balance
of plus and minus, or negative and positive, is destroyed or re-es-
tablished,) images out both past and present. Aristotle delivers a
just theory, without pretending to an hypothesis; or in other words,
8

<page 67>
66 BIOGKAPHIA LITERARIA.
a comprehensive survey of the different facts, and of their relations
to each other, without supposition, i. e. a fact placed under a num-
ber of facts, as their common support and explanation; though in
the majority of instances, these hypotheses or suppositions better
deserve the name of T*otfonis«f, or suffictions. He uses, indeed,
the word Kiviggsfc, to express what we call representations or ideas,
but he carefully distinguishes them from material motion, desig-
nating the latter always by annexing the words Ev <nwrw, or Kara,
roifov. On the contrary, in his treatise "De Anima," he excludes
place and motion from all the operations of thought, whether rep-
resentations or volitions, as attributes utterly and absurdly hetero-
geneous.
The general law of association, or more accurately the common
condition under which all exciting causes act, and in which they
may be generalized, according to Aristotle, is this: Ideas, by hav-
ing been together, acquire a power of recalling each other; or every
partial representation awakes the total representation of which it
had been a part. In the practical determination of this common
principle to particular recollections, he admits five agents or oc-
casioning causes: 1st, connection in time, whether simultaneous,
preceding or successive; 2d, vicinity or connection in space; 3d,
interdependence or necessary connection, as cause and effect; 4th, likeness; and 5th, contrast. As an additional solution of the oc-
casional seeming chasms in the continuity of reproduction, he
proves that movements or ideas possessing one or the other of
these five characters had passed through the mind as intermediate
links, sufficiently clear to recal other parts of the same total impres-
sions with which they had co-existed, though not vivid enough to
excite that degree of attention which is requisite for distinct recol-
lection, or as we may aptly express it, after-consciousness. In as-
sociation, then, consists the whole mechanism of the reproduction
of impressions, in the Aristotelian Psychology. It is the universal
law of the passive fancy and mechanical memory; that which sup-
plies to all other faculties their objects, to all thought the elements
of its materials.
In consulting the excellent commentary of St. Thomas Aquinas
on the Parva Naturalia of Aristotle, I was struck at once with its
close resemblance to Hume's essay on association. The main
thoughts were the same in both, the order of the thoughts was the

<page 68>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 67
same, and even the illustrations differed only by Hume's occasional
substitution of more modern examples. I mentioned the circum-
stance to several of my literary acquaintances, who admitted the
closeness of the resemblance, and that it seemed too great to be
explained by mere coincidence; but they thought it improbable that
Hume should have held the pages of the angelic Doctor worth
turning over. But some time after, Mr. Payne, of the King's
mews, showed Sir James Mackintosh some odd volumes of St.
Thomas Aquinas, partly perhaps from having heard that Sir James
(then Mr.) Mackintosh had in his lectures past a high encomium
on this canonized philosopher, but chiefly from the fact, that the
volumes had belonged to Mr. Hume, and had here and there mar-
ginal marks and notes of reference in his own hand writing. Among
thesevolumes was that which contains the Pare a Naturalia, in the
old latin version, swathed and swaddled in the commentary afore
mentioned!
It remains, then, for me, first,-to state wherein Hartley differs
from Aristotle; then, to exhibit the grounds of my conviction, that
he differed only to err; and next, as the result, to show, by what influences of the choice and judgment the associative power be-
comes either memory or fancy; and, in conclusion, to appropriate
the remaining offices of the mind to the reason and the imagination.
With my best efforts to be as perspicuous as the nature of language
will permit on such a subject, I earnestly solicit the good wishes
and friendly patience of my readers, while I thus go " sounding on
my dim and perilous way."

<page 69>
CHAPTER VI.
That Hartley's system, as far as it differs from that of Aristotle, is neither tena-
ble in theory, nor founded in facts.
Of Hartley's hypothetical vibrations in his hypothetical oscil-
lating ether of the nerves, which is the first and most obvious dis-
tinction between his system and that of Aristotle, I shall say little.
This, with all other similar attempts to render that an object of the
sight which has no relation to sight, has been already sufficiently
exposed by the younger Reimarus, Maasse, &c. as outraging the very axioms of mechanics, in a scheme, the merit of which consists
in its being mechanical. Whether any other philosophy be possi-
ble, but the mechanical; and again, whether the mechanical system
can have any claim to be called philosophy; are questions for ano-
ther place. It is, however, certain, that as long as we deny the
former, and affirm the latter, we must bewilder ourselves, whenever
we would pierce into the adyta of causation ; and all that laborious
conjecture can do, is to fill up the gaps of fancy. Under that des-
potism of the eye, (the emancipation from which Pythagoras by his
numeral, and Plato by his musical, symbols, and both by geometric
discipline, aimed at, as the first irjo*ai5suTi ov of the mind)—under
this strong sensuous influence, we are restless, because invisible
things are not the objects of vision; and metaphysical systems, for
the most part, become popular, not for their truth, but in propor-
tion as they attribute to causes a susceptibility of being seen, if only
our visual organs were sufficiently powerful.
From a hundred possible confutations, let one suffice. Accord-
ing to this system, the idea or vibration a from the external object
A becomes associable with the idea or vibration m from the external
object M, because the oscillation a propagated itself so as to re-
produce the oscillation m. But the original impression from M
was essentially different from the impression A: unless, therefore,
different causes may produce the same effect, the vibration a could
never produce the vibration m; and this, therefore, could never be
the means by which a and m are associated. To understand this,
the attentive reader need only be reminded, that the ideas are them-

<page 70>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. (')<)
selves, in Hartley's system, nothing more than their appropriate
configurative vibrations. It is a mere delusion of the fancy to con-
ceive the pre-existenee of the ideas, in any chain of association, as
so many differently coloured billiard-balls in contact, so that when
an object, the billiard-stick, strikes the first or white ball, the same
motion propagates itself through the red, green, blue, black, &c.
and sets the whole in motion. No! we must suppose the very
same force, which constitutes the white ball, to constitute the red or
black; or the idea of a circle to constitute the idea of a triangle;
which is impossible.
But it may be said, that, by the sensations from the objects A
and M, the nerves have acquired a disposition to the vibrations a
and m, and therefore a need only be repeated in order to reproduce
m. Now we will grant, for a moment, the possibility of such a
disposition in a material nerve; which yet seems scarcely less ab-
surd than to say, that a weather-cock had acquired a habit of turn-
ing to the east, from the wind having been so long in that quarter:
for if it be replied, that we must take in the circumstance of life,
what then becomes of the mechanical philosophy? And what is
the nerve, but the flint which the wag placed in the pot as the first
ingredient of his stone-broth, requiring only salt, turnips, and mut-
ton, for the remainder? But if we waive this, and presuppose the
actual existence of such a disposition, two cases are possible.
Either, every idea has its own nerve and correspondent oscillation,
or this is not the case. If the latter be the truth, we should gain
nothing by these dispositions; for then, every nerve having several
dispositions, when the motion of any other nerve is propagated into
it, there will be no ground or cause present, why exactly the oscil-
lation m should arise, rather than any other to which it was equally
predisposed. But if we take the former, and let every idea have a
nerve of its own, then every nerve must be capable of propagating
its motion into many other nerves; and again, there is no reason
assignable, why the vibration m should arise, rather than any other
ad libitum.
It is fashionable to smile at Hartley's vibrations and vibratiun-
cles; and his work has been re-edited by Priestly, with the omission
of the material hypothesis. But Hartley was too great a man, too
coherent a thinker, for this to have been done either consistently or
to any wise purpose. For all other parts of his system, as far as

<page 71>
70 BIOGRAPHIA r.ITF.ltARIA.
they are peculiar to that system, once removed from their mechan-
ical basis, not only lose their main support, but the very motive
which led to their adoption. Thus the principle of contemporaneity,
which Aristotle had made the common condition of all the laws of
association, Hartley was constrained to represent as being itself
the sole law. For to what law can the action of material atoms be
subject, but that of proximity in place? And to what law can their
motion be subjected, but that of time.? Again, from this results in-
evitably, that the will, the reason, the judgment, and the under-
standing, instead of being the determining causes of association,
must needs be represented as its creatures, and among its mechan-
ical effects. Conceive, for instance, a broad stream, winding
through a mountainous country, with an indefinite number of cur-
rents, varying and running into each other according as the gusts
chance to blow from the opening of the mountains. The tempora-
ry union of several currents in one, so as to form the main current of the moment, would present an accurate image of Hartley's theo-
ry of the will.
Had this been really the case, the consequence would have been,
that our whole life would be divided between the despotism of out-
ward impressions, and that of senseless and passive memory. Take
his law in its highest abstraction and most philosophical form, viz:
that every partial representation recalls the total representation of
which it was a part; and the law becomes nugatory, were it only
from its universality. In practice it would, indeed, be mere law-
lessness. Consider how immense must be the sphere of a total
impression from the top of St. Paul's church; and how rapid and
continuous the series of such total impressions. If, therefore, we
suppose the absence of all interference of the will, reason, and judg-
ment, one or other of two consequences must result. Either the
ideas, (or relicts of such impressions,) will exactly imitate the order
of the impression itself, which would be absolute delirium; or any
one part of that impression might recall any other part, and, (as
from the law of continuity there must exist, in every total impres-
sion, some one or more parts, which are components of some other
following impression, and so on ad infinitum,) any part of any im-
pression might recall any part of any other, without a cause present
to determine what it should be. For to bring in the will, or reason,
as causes of their own cause, that is, at once causes and effects,

<page 72>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERABIA. 7l
Can satisfy those only who, in their pretended evidences of a God,
having, first, demanded organization as the sole cause and ground
of intellect, will, then, coolly demand the pre-existence of intellect
as the cause and ground-work of organization. There is, in truth, but one state to which this theory applies at all, namely, that of complete lightheadedness; and even to this it applies but partially, because the will and reason are, perhaps, never wholly suspended. A case of this kind occurred in a Catholic town in Germany, a
year or two before my arrival at Gottingen, and had not then ceased
to be a frequent subject of conversation. A young woman of four
or five and twenty, who could neither read nor write, was seized
with a nervous fever; during which, according to the asseverations
of all the priests and monks of the neighborhood, she became pos-
sessed, and, as it appeared, by a very learned devil. She continued
incessantly talking Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, in very pompous
tones, and with most distinct enunciation. This possession was
rendered more probable, by the known fact that she was, or had
been, an heretic. Voltaire humourously advises the devil to de-
cline all acquaintance with medical men; and it would have been
more to his reputation if he had taken this advice in the present
instance. The case had attracted the particular attention of a
young physician, and, by his statement, many eminent physiolo-
gists and psychologists visited the town, and cross-examined the
case on the spot. Sheets full of her ravings were taken down from
her own mouth, and were found to consist of sentences coherent
and intelligible each for itself, but with little or no connection with
each other. Of the Hebrew, a small portion only could be traced
to the Bible; the remainder seemed to be in the rabbinical dialect.
All trick or conspiracy was out of the question. Not only had the
young woman ever been an harmless, simple creature, but she was
evidently labouring under a nervous fever. In the town in which
she had been resident for many years, as a servant in different
families, no solution presented itself. The young physician, how-
ever, determined to trace her past life step by step; for the patient
herself was incapable of returning a rational answer. He, at length,
succeeded in discovering the place where her parents had lived;
travelled thither, found them dead, but an uncle surviving; and from
him learnt, that the patient had been charitably taken by an old
protestant pastor at nine years old, and had remained with him

<page 73>
72 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARJA.
some years, even till the old man's death. Of this pastor the uncle
knew nothing, but that he was a very good man. With great dif-
ficulty, and after much search, our young medical philosopher dis-
covered a niece of the pastor's, who had lived with him as his
house-keeper, and had inherited his effects. She remembered the
girl; related, that her venerable uncle had been too indulgent, and
could not bear to hear the girl scolded; that she was willing to have
kept her, but that, after her patron's death, the girl herself refused
to stay. Anxious inquiries were then, of course, made concerning
the pastor's habits, and the solution of the phenomenon was soon
obtained. For it appeared, that it had been the old man's custom
for years, to walk up and down a passage of his house, into which
the kitchen door opened, and to read to himself, with a loud voice,
out of his favorite books. A considerable number of these were
still in the niece's possession. She added, that he was a very
learned man, and a great Hebraist. Among the books were found
a collection of rabbinical writings, together with several of the
Greek and Latin fathers; and the physician succeeded in identify-
ing so many passages with those taken down at the young woman's
bedside, that no doubt-could remain in any rational mind, concern-
ing the true origin of the impressions made on her nervous system.
This authenticated case furnishes both proof and instance, that
relicks of sensation may exist, for an indefinite time, in a latent
state, in the very same order in which they were originally impress-
ed; and, as we cannot rationally suppose the feverish state of the
brain to act in any other way than as a stimulus, this fact, (and it
would not be difficult to adduce several of the same kind,) contri-
butes to make it even probable, that all thoughts are, in themselves,
imperishable ; and that, if the intelligent faculty should be rendered
more comprehensive, it would require only a different and appor-
tioned organization, the body celestial instead of the body terrestrial,
to bring before every human soul the collective experience of its
whole past existence. And this—this, perchance, is the dread
book of judgment, in whose mysterious hieroglyphics every idle
word is recorded! Yea, in the very nature of a living spirit, it may
be more possible that heaven and earth should pass away, than that
a single act, a single thought, should be loosened, or lost, from that
living chain of causes, to all whose links, conscious or unconscious,
the free will, our only absolute self, is co-extensive and co-present.

<page 74>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 73
But not now dare I longer discourse of this, waiting for a loftier
mood, and a nobler subject, warned from within and from without,
that it is profanation to speak of these mysteries * roTg fiwi<5eVoTS
qxtvTasSeijiv, ug xaXov to t»js oWiojuvtij xal gucpgogCvrig tfjojurfov, xai is
jsts 'ig*Sgog kVs suog Sstw xaXot. Tiv yap ojuvra tfpoj to 6ju(asvov juy-
ysvsV *<*' 'ofioiov ifoi*jfa(Ji£vov 5sriirij8aXXsiv tjj s"a' ou yap av tfwtfoTS ei'Jev
*0<pSaX|Aos HXiov rjkiosiSris W yEysv^fjiEvoj, '£8$ to KaXov av ioVj Tu^ij
f«g xaXs ysvofisvi]. Plotinus.
* "To those to whose imagination it has never been presented, how beautiful
is the countenance of justice and wisdom; and that neither the morning nor the
evening star are so fair. For, in order to direct the view aright, it behoves that
the beholder should have made himself congenerous and similar to the object be-
held. Never could the eye have beheld the sun, had not its own essence been
soliform," {thai is, pre-conjigured to light by a similarity of essence with that of
light,) "neither can a soul not beautiful attain to an intuition of beauty."
9

<page 75>
CHAPTER VII.
Of the necessary consequences of the Hartleian theory—Of the original mistake
or equivocation which procured admission for the theory—Memoria Technica.
We will pass by the utter incompatibility of such a law, (if law it
may be called, which would itself be the slave of chances,) with
even that appearance of rationality forced upon us by the outward
phenomena of human conduct, abstracted from our own conscious-
ness. We will agree to forget this for the moment, in order to fix
our attention on that subordination of final to efficient causes in the
human being, which flows of necessity from the assumption, that
the will, and with the will all acts of thought and attention, are parts
and products of this blind mechanism, instead of being distinct
powers, whose function it is to control, determine, and modify the
phantasma chaos of association. The soul becomes a mere ens
logicum; for as a real separable being, it would be more worthless
and ludicrous, than the Grimalkins in the Catharpsichord, described
in the Spectator. For these did form a part of the process; but in
Hartley's scheme the soul is present only to be pinched or stroked,
while the very squeals or purring are produced by an agency wholly
'independent and alien. It involves all the difficulties, all the incom-
prehensibility (if it be not indeed, ug sfioiys doxsi, the absurdity) of
intercommunion between substances that have no one property in
common, without any of the convenient consequences that bribed
the judgment to the admission of the dualistic hypothesis. Ac-
cordingly, this caput mortuum of the Hartleian process has been
'rejected by his followers, and the consciousness considered as a
result, as a tune, the common product of the breeze and the harp:
i though this again is the mere remotion of one absurdity, to make
way for another equally preposterous. For what is harmony but a
mode of relation, the very esse of which is percipi 1 An ens ration-
ale, which presupposes the power, that by perceiving creates it?
The razor's edge becomes a saw to the armed vision; and the de-
licious melodies of Purcell or Cimarosa might be disjointed stam-
merings to a hearer, whose partition of time should be a thousand
times subtler than ours. But this obstacle too, let us imagine our-

<page 76>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 75
selves to have surmounted, and "at one bound high overleap all
bound!" Yet, according to his hypothesis, the disquisition, to
which I am at present soliciting the reader's attention, may be as
truly said to be written by Saint Paul's church, as by me; for it is
the mere motion of my muscles and nerves: and these again are
set in motion from external causes equally passive, which external
causes stand themselves in interdependent connection with every
thing that exists or has existed. Thus the whole universe co-ope-
rates to produce the minutest stroke of every letter, save only that
I myself, and I alone, have nothing to do with it, but merely the
causeless and effectless beholding of it when it is done. Yet scarce-
ly can it be called a beholding ; for it is neither an act nor an effect;
but an impossible creation of a something-nothing out of its very
contrary! It is the mere quick-silver plating behind a looking-
glass; and in this alone consists the poor worthless I! The sum
total of my moral and intellectual intercourse, dissolved into its
elements, are reduced to extension, motion, degrees of velocity, and
those diminished copies of configurative motion, which form what
we call notions, and notions of notions. Of such philosophy well
might Butler say—
"The metaphysics but a puppet motion
That goes with screws, the notion of a notion;
The copy of a copy, and lame draught
Unnaturally taken from a thought:
That counterfeits all pantomimic tricks,
And turns the eyes, like an old crucifix;
That counterchanges whatsoe'er it calls
B'another name, and makes it true or false;
Turns truth to falsehood, falsehood into truth,
By virtue of the Babylonian's tooth."
Miscellaneous Thoughts.
The inventor of the watch did not in reality invent it; he only
looked on, while the blind causes, the only true artists, were unfold-
ing themselves. So must it have been too with my friend Alls-
ton, when he sketched his picture of the dead man revived by the
bones of the prophet Elijah. So must it have been with Mr. Sou-
they and Lord Byron, when the one fancied himself composing
his "Roderick," and the other his " Childe Harold." The same
must hold good of all systems of philosophy; of all arts, govern-
ments, wars by sea and by land; in short, of all things that ever

<page 77>
76 BIOGRAPIIIA LITEKARIA.
have been or that ever will be produced. For, acccording to this
system, it is not the affections and passions that are at work, in as
far as they are sensations or thoughts. We only fancy that we act
from rational resolves, or prudent motives, or from impulses of an-
ger, love, or generosity. In all these cases the real agent is a
something-nolhing-every-thing, which does all of which we know,
and knows nothing of all that itself does.
The existence of an infinite spirit, of an intelligent and holy will,
must, on this system, be mere articulated motions of the air. For
as the function of the human understanding is no other than merely
(to appear to itself) to combine and to apply the phenomena of
the association ; and as these derive all their reality from the prima-
ry sensations ; and the sensations again all their reality from the im-
pressions ab extra ; a God not visible, audible, or tangible, can exist
only in the sounds and letters that form his name and attributes. If in ourselves there be no such faculties as those of the will, and
the scientific reason, we must either have an innate idea. o£ them,
which would overthrow the whole system, or we can have no idea
at all. The process, by which Hume degraded the notion of cause
and effect into a blind product of delusion and habit, into the mere
sensation of proceeding life (nisus vitalis) associated with the ima-
ges of the memory; this same process must be repeated to the
equal degradation of every fundamental idea in ethics or theology.
Far, very far, am I from burthening with the odium of these con-
sequences the moral characters of those who first formedror have-
since adopted the system! It is most noticeable of the excellent
and pious Hartley, that in the proofs of the existence and attributes
of God, with which his second volume commences, he makes no
reference to the principles or results of the first. Nay, he assumes, as his foundations, ideas which, if we embrace the doctrines of his
first volume, can exist no where but in the vibrations of the ethe-
real medium common to the nerves and to the atmosphere. In-
deed, the whole of the second volume is, with the fewest possible exceptions, independent of his peculiar system. So true is it, that
the faith, which saves and sanctifies, is a collective energy^a total
act of the whole moral being; that its living sensorium is in the
heart; and that no errors of the understanding can be morally ar-
raigned, unless they have proceeded from the heart. But whether
they be such, no man can be certain in the case of another, scarce-

<page 78>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 77
Iy, perhaps, even in his own. Hence it follows, by inevitable con-
sequence, that man may perchance determine what is an heresy;
but God can only know who is an heretic. It does not, however,
by any means follow, that opinions fundamentally false are harm-
less. An hundred causes may co-exist to form one complex anti-
dote. Yet the sting of the adder remains venomous, though there
are many who have taken up the evil thing; and it hurted them not!
Some indeed there seem to have been, in an unfortunate neighbour-
nation at least, who have embraced this system with a full view of
all its moral and religious consequences; some—
"' who deem themselves most free,
When they within this gross and visible sphere
Chain down the winged thought, scoffing assent,
Proud in their meanness; and themselves they cheat
With noisy emptiness of learned phrase,
Their subtle fluids, impacts, essences,
Self-working tools, uncaus'd effects, and all
Those blink omniscients, those Almighty slaves,
Untenanting Creation of its God!"
Such men need discipline, not argument; they must be made better
men, before they can become wiser. l
The attention will be more profitably employed in attempting to
discover and expose the paralogisms, by the magic of which such
a faith could find admission into minds framed for a nobler creed.
These, it appears to me, may be all reduced to one sophism as
their common genus; the mistaking the conditions of a thing for its
causes and essence; and the process by which we arrive at the know-
ledge of a faculty, for the faculty itself. The air I breathe is the
condition of my life, not its cause. We could never have learnt
that we had eyes but by the process of seeing; yet having seen,
we know that the eyes must have pre-existed in order to render
the process of sight possible. Let us cross-examine Hartley's
scheme under the guidance of this distinction ; ■ add we shall dis-
cover, that contemporaneity (Leibnitz's Lex Continui) is the limit
and condition of the laws of mind, itself being rather a law of mat-
ter, at least of phenomena considered as material. At the utmost,,
k is to thought the same as the law of gravitation is to loco-motion.
In every voluntary movement we first counteract gravitation, in or-
der to avail ourselves of it. It must exist, that there may be a
something to be counteracted, and which by its re-action, aids the

<page 79>
78 B10GBAPIIIA LITERAIUA.
force that is exerted to resist it. Let us consider what we do when
we leap. We first resist the gravitating power by an act purely
voluntary, and then by another act, voluntary in part, we yield to it
in order to light on the spot which we had previously proposed to
ourselves. Now, let a man watch his mind while he is composing;
or, to take a still more common case, while he is trying to recollect
/"Ni name; and he will find the process completely analogous. Most
of my readers will have observed a small water insect on the sur-
face of rivulets, which throws a cinque-spotted shadow, fringed
with prismatic colours, on the sunny bottom of the brook ; and will
have noticed, how the little animal wins its way up against the
stream, by alternate pulses of active and passive motion, now re-
sisting the current, and now yielding to it in order to gather strength
and a momentary fulcrum for a further propulsion. This is no un-
apt emblem of the mind's self-experience in the act of thinking.
There are evidently two powers at work, which relatively to each
other are active and passive ; and this is not possible without an in-
termediate faculty, which is at once both active and passive. (In
philosophical language, we must denominate this intermediate facul-
ty in all its degrees and determinations, the imagination. But
in common language, and especially on the subject of poetry, we
appropriate the name to a superior degree of the faculty, joined to
/ a superior voluntary control over it.)
Contemporaneity then, being the common condition of all the
laws of association, and a component element in all the materia
subjecta, the parts of which are to be associated, must needs be
co-present with all. Nothing, therefore, can be more easy than to
pass off on an incautious mind, this constant companion of each, for
the essential substance of all. But if we appeal to our own con-
sciousness, we shall find that even time itself, as the cause of a par-
ticular act of association, is distinct from contemporaneity, as the
condition of all association. Seeing a mackerel, it may happen
that I immediately think of gooseberries, because I at the same
time ate mackerel with gooseberries as the sauce. The first sylla-
ble of the latter word, being that which had co-existed with the im-
age of the bird so called, I may then think of a goose. In the next
moment the image of a swan may arise before me, though I had
never seen the two birds together. In the two former instances, I
am conscious that their co-existence in time was the circumstance

<page 80>
BIOGHAPHIA LITERARIA. 79
that enabled me to recollect them; and equally conscious am I, that
the latter was recalled to me by the joint operation of likeness and
contrast. So it is with cause and effect; so too with order. So am
I able to distinguish whether it was proximity in time, or continuity
in space, that occasioned me to recall B on the mention of A.
They cannot be indeed separated from contemporaneity; for that
would be to separate them from the mind itself. The act of con-
sciousness is indeed identical with time, considered in its essence.
(I mean time per se, as contra-distinguished from our notion of
time; for this is always blended with the idea of space, which, as
the contrary of time, is therefore its measure.) Nevertheless, the
accident of seeing two objects at the same moment, acts as a dis-
tinguishable cause from that of having seen them in the same place;
and the true practical general law of association is this: that what-
ever makes certain parts of a total impression more vivid or distinct
than the rest, will determine the mind to recall these, in preference
to others equally linked together by the common condition of con-
temporaneity, or (what I deem a more appropriate and philosophical
term) of continuity. But the will itself, by confining and intensify-
ing * the attention, may arbitrarily give vividness or distinctness to
any object whatsoever; and from hence we may deduce the use-
lessness, if not the absurdity, of certain recent schemes, which
promise an artificial memory, but which in reality can only produce
a confusion and debasement of the fancy. Sound logic, as the ha-
bitual subordination of the individual to the species, and of the spe-
cies to the genus ; philosopoical knowledge of facts under the rela-
tion of cause and effect; a cheerful and communicative temper,
that disposes us to notice the similarities and contrasts of things,
that we may be able to illustrate the one by the other ; a quiet con-
science; a condition free from anxieties ; sound health, and, above
all, (as far as relates to passive remembrance,) a healthy digestion;
these are the best—these are the only Arts of Memory.
* I am aware that this word occurs neither in Johnson's Dictionary nor in any
classical writer. But the word " to intend," which Newton and others before him
employ in this sense, is now so completely appropriated to another meaning, that
I could not use it without ambiguity: while to paraphrase the sense, as by render
intense, would often break up the sentence, and destroy that harmony of the posi-
tion of the words with the logical position of the thoughts, which is a beauty in all
composition, and more especially desirable in a close philosophical investigation
I have therefore hazarded the word intensify; though I confess it sounds uncouth
to my own ear.

<page 81>
CHAPTER VIII.
The system of Dualism, introduced by Des Cartes—Refined first by Spinoza,
and afterwards by Leibnitz, into the doctrine of Harmonia prcestabilita—Hylo-
soism—Materialism—Neither of these systems, on any possible theory of asso-
ciation, supplies or supersedes a theory of perception, or explains the formation of the associablc. , . ■
To the best of my knowledge, Des Cartes was the first philoso-
pher who introduced the absolute and essential heterogeneity of the
soul as intelligence, and the body as matter. The assumption, and
the form of speaking, have remained, though the denial of all other
properties to matter but that of extension, on which denial the whole
system of dualism is grounded, has been long exploded. For since
impenetrability is intelligible only as a mode of resistance, its ad-
mission places the essence of'matter in an act or power, which it
possesses in common with spirit; and body and spirit are therefore
no longer absolutely heterogeneous, but may, without any absurdity,
be supposed to be different modes or degrees in perfection, of a
common substratum. To this possibility, however, it was not the
fashion to advert. The soul was a thinking substance; and body
a space-filling substance. Yet the apparent action of each on the
other pressed heavy on the philosopher, on the one hand; and no
less heavily, on the other hand, pressed the evident truth, that the
law of causalty holds only between homogeneous things, i. e. things
having some common property, and cannot extend from one world
into another, its opposite. A close analysis evinced it to be no less
absurd, than the question, whether a man's affection for his wife lay
North-east or South-west of the love he bore towards his child?
Leibnitz's doctrine of a pre-established harmony, which he certain-
ly borrowed from Spinoza, who had himself taken the hint from Des
Cartes' animal machines, was in its common interpretation too
strange to survive the inventor—too repugnant to our common sense
(which is not indeed entitled to a judicial voice in the courts of sci-
entific philosophy; but whose whispers still exert a strong secret
influence.) Even Wolf, the admirer, and illustrious systematizer
of the Leibnitzian doctrine, contents himself with defending Jhe

<page 82>

BIOGRAFHIA LITEKaRIA.
81
possibility of the idea, but does not adopt it as a part of ihe edTnee.
The hypothesis of Hylozoism, on the other side, is the death of
all rational physiology, and, indeed, of all physical science; for that
requires a limitation of terms, and cannot consist with the arbitrary
power of multiplying attributes by occult qualities. Besides, it an-
swers no purpose; unless, indeed, a difficulty can be solved by mul-
tiplying it, for that we can acquire a clearer notion of our soul, by
being told that we have a million souls, and that every atom of our
bodies has a soul of its own. Far more prudent is it to admit the
difficulty once for all, and then let it lie at rest. There is a sedi-
ment, indeed, at the bottom of the vessel, but all the water above it
is clear and transparent. The Hylozoist only shakes it up, and
renders the whole turbid.
But it is not either the nature of man, or the duty of the philosopher, to despair, concerning any important problem, until, as in the
squaring of the circle, the impossibility of a solution has been
demonstrated. How the esse assumed as originally distinct from
the scire, can ever unite itself with it; how being can transform
itself into a knowing, becomes conceivable on one only condition;
namely, if it can be shown that the vis representative, or the sen-
tient, is itself a species of being; i. e. either as a property or at-
tribute, or as an hypostasis or self subsistence. The former is,
indeed, the assumption of materialism; a system which could not
but be patronized by the philosopher, if only it actually performed
what it promises. But how any affection from without can meta-
morphose itself into perception or will, the materialist has hitherto
left, not only as incomprehensible as he found it, but has aggra-
vated it into a comprehensible absurdity. For, grant that an ob-
ject from without could act upon the conscious self, as on a con- substantial object; yet such an affection could only engender
something homogeneous with itself. Motion could only propagate
motion. Matter has no inward. We remove one surface but to
meet with another. We can but divide a particle into particles;
and each atom comprehends in itself the properties of the material
universe. Let any reflecting mind make the experiment of ex-
plaining to itself the evidence of our sensuous intuitions, from the
hypothesis that in any given perception there is a something which
has been communicated to it by an impact or an impression ab ex-
tja. In the first place, by the impact on the percepient or ens rep-
,
I
r
10
<page 83>
82 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
/
resentans, not the object itself, but only its action or effect, will
pass into the same. Not the iron tongue, but its vibrations pass
into the metal of the bell. Now in our immediate perception, it is
not the mere power or act of the object, but the object itself, which
is immediately present. We might, indeed, attempt to explain
this result by a chain of deductions and conclusions; but that, first,
the very faculty of deducing and concluding would equally demand
an explanation; and, secondly, that there exists, in fact, no such
intermediation by logical notions, such as those of cause and effect.
It is the object itself, not the product of a syllogism, which is pre-
sent to our consciousness. Or would we explain this supervention
of the object to the sensation, by a productive faculty set in motion
by an impulse; still the transition, into the percepient, of the object
itself, from which the impulse proceeded, assumes a power that
can permeate and wholly possess the soul,
"And like a God, by spiritual art,
Be all in all, and all in every part."
Cowley.
', ■ •>
And how came the percepient here? And what is become of the
wonder-promising matter, that was to perform all these marvels
by force of mere figure, weight, and motion? The most consis-
tent proceeding of the dogmatic materialist is to fall back into the
common rank of soul-and-bodyists; to affect the mysterious, and
declare the whole process a revelation given, and not to be under-
stood, which it would be profane to examine too closely. Datur
non intelligitur. But a revelation unconfirmed by miracles, and a
faith not commanded by the conscience, a philosopher may venture
to pass by, without suspecting himself of any irreligious tendency.
Thus, as materialism has been generally taught, it is utterly un-
intelligible, and owes all its proselytes to the propensity so com-
mon among men, to mistake distinct images for clear conceptions;
and, vice versa, to reject as inconceivable whatever from its own
nature is unimaginable. But as soon as it becomes intelligible, it
ceases to be materialism. In order to explain thinking, as a ma-
terial phenomenon, it is necessary to refine matter into a mere
modification of intelligence, with the two-fold function of appearing
and perceiving. Even so did Priestly in his controversy with
Price! He stript matter of all its material properties; substituted

<page 84>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARiA. 83
1
spiritual powers, and when we expected to find a body, behold!
we had nothing but its ghost! the apparition of a defunct substance!I shall not dilate further on this subject; because it will (if God
grant health and permission) be treated of at large, and systemat-
ically, in a work, which I have many years been preparing, on the
Productive Logos human and divine; with, and, as the introduc-
tion to, a full commentary on the Gospel of St. John. To make
myself intelligible as far as my present subject requires, it will be
sufficient briefly to observe—1. That all association demands and
presupposes the existence of the thoughts and images to be asso-
ciated. 2. The hypothesis of an external world exactly corres-
pondent to those images or modifications of our own being, which
alone (according to this system) we actually behold, is as thorough
idealism as Berkeley's, inasmuch as it equally (perhaps, in a more
perfect degree) removes all reality and immediateness of percep-
tion, and places us in a dream-world of phantoms and spectres, the
inexplicable swarm and equivocal generation of motions in our
own brains. 3. That this hypothesis neither involves the explana-
tion, nor precludes the necessity, of a mechanism and co-adequate
forces in the percepient, which at the more than magic touch of
the impulse from without, is to create anew for itself the corres- /pondent object. The formation of a copy is not solved by the
mere pre-existence of an original; the copyist of Raphael's Trans-
figuration must repeat more or less perfectly the process of Rapha-
el. It would be easy to explain a thought from the image on the
retina, and that from the geometry of light, if this very light did not
present the very same difficulty. We might as rationally chant the
Brahmin creed of the tortoise that supported the bear, that support-
ed the elephant, that supported the world, to the tune of " This is
the house that Jack built." The sic Deo placitum est we all admit
as the sufficient cause, and the divine goodness as the sufficient
reason; but an answer to the whence? and why? is no answer to
the how; which alone is the physiologist's concern. It is a mere
sophisma pigrum, and (as Bacon hath said) the arrogance of pu-
sillanimity, which lifts up the idol of a mortal's fancy, and com-
mands us to fall down and worship it, as a work of divine wisdom,
an ancile or palladium fallen from heaven. By the very same ar-
gumenTthe supporters of the Ptolemaic system might have rebuffed

<page 85>
84
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
the Newtonian, and pointing to the sky with self-complacent * grin,
have appealed to common sense, whether the sun did not move, and
the earth stand still.
* "And'coxcombs vanquish Berkeley with a grin.'1 ftpt'j
■4
■. ft,'.
\ -A„ v..
> ■I -*'■.-■' - ■ . ■'
.1. Mill
...y'r: .
-\
-■?*""
'"'•>«-
■rtr■/.._i-i;
■4* *.-.
, A y>.
l - . .-»*'• «... '..'• 4. . .
-■'t' >r'---.V - . .;•. . '-t*"» n^P'^* -t.- *• - '*■' ■'■
• . »- •• -..'.>t ■','-■ «S .. ■<,- -i, :■•%,■.■%■■*■

<page 86>
CHAPTER IX.
is philosophy possible as a science ? and what are its conditions ?—Giordano Bru-
no—Literary aristocracy, or the existence of a tacit compact among the learned
■ as a privileged order—The author's obligations to the Mystics—to Emanuel
Kant—The difference between the letter and the spirit of Kant's writings, and
a vindication of prudence in the teaching of philosophy—Fichte's attempt to
complete the critical system—Its partial success and ultimate failure—Obliga-
tions to Schelling; and, among English writers, to Saumarez.
After I had successively studied in the schools of Locke,
Berkeley, Leibnitz, and Hartley, and could find in neither of them
an abiding place for my reason, I began to ask myself, is a system
of philosophy, as different from mere history and historic classifi-
cation, possible? If possible, what are its necessary conditions?
I was for a while disposed to answer the first question in the nega-
tive, and to admit that the sole practicable employment for the hu-
man mind was to observe, to collect, and to classify. But I soon
felt, that human nature itself fought up against this wilful resigna-
tion of intellect; and as soon did I find, that the scheme, taken
with all its consequences, and cleared of all inconsistencies, was
not less impracticable, than contra-natural. Assume, in its full
extent, the position, nihil in intellectu quod nonprius in sensa, with-
out Leibnitz's qualifying prosier ipmm intellectum, and in the same
sense in which it was understood by Hartley and Condillac, and
what Hume had demonstratively deduced from this concession
concerning cause and effect, will apply with equal and crushing
force to all the * other eleven categorical forms, and the logical
functions corresponding to them. How can we make bricks with-
out straw? Or build without cement? We learn all things indeed
by occasion of experience; but the very facts so learnt force us in-
ward on the antecedents, that must be pre-supposed in order to ren-
der experience itself possible. The first book of Locke's Essays
(if the supposed error, which it labours to subvert, be not a mere
thing of straw; an absurdity, which no man ever did, or, indeed,
* Videlicet; quantity, quality, relation, and mode, each consisting of three sub-
divisions. Vide Kritik der reineu Vernunft, p. 95, and 106. See, too, the judi
c,ous remarks in Locke and Hume.

<page 87>
86 BI0GRAPH1A L1TERARIA.
ever could believe) is formed on a 2<><pij(j,a ET£po£»j<r»jfs'wj, and in-
volves the old mistake of cum hoc : ergo, propter hoc.
The term Philosophy, defines itself as an affectionate seeking
after the truth; but Truth is the correlative of Being. This again
is no way conceivable; but by assuming as a postulate, that both
are, ab initio, identical and co-inherent; that intelligence and being
are reciprocally each other's Substrate. I presumed that this was
a possible conception (i. e. that it involved no logical inconsonance)
from the length of time during which the scholastic definition of the
Supreme Being, as actus purissimus sine ulla potentialitate, was
received in the schools of Theology, both by the Pontifician and
the Reformed divines. The early study of Plato and Plotinus, with
the commentaries and the Theologia Platonica, of the illus-
trious Florentine ; of Proclus, and Gemistius Pletho ; and, at a later
period, of the " De Immenso et Innumerabili," and the "De la cau-
sa, principio et uno," of the philosoper of Nola, who could boast of
a Sir Philip Sydney, and Fulke Greville among his patrons, and
whom the idolaters of Rome burnt as an atheist in the year 1660;
had all contributed to prepare my mind for the reception and wel-
coming of the Cogito quia sum, et sum quia Cogito; a philosophy
of seeming hardihood, but certainly the most ancient, and therefore
presumptively, the most natural.
Why need I be afraid? Say rather how dare I be ashamed of
the Teutonic theosophist, Jacob Behmen? Many, indeed, and
gross were his delusions j and such as furnish frequent and ample
occasion for the triumph of the learned over the poor ignorant
shoemaker, who had dared to think for himself. But while we re-
member that these delusions were such as might be anticipated
from his utter want of all intellectual discipline, and from his ig-
norance of rational psychology, let it not be forgotten that the lat-
ter defect he had in common with the most learned theologians of
his age. Neither with books, nor with book-learned men was he
conversant. A meek and shy quietist, his intellectual powers were
never stimulated into fev'rous energy by crowds of proselytes, or
by the ambition of proselyting. Jacob Behmen was an enthusiast,
in the strictest sense, as not merely distinguished, but as contra-
distinguished, from a fanatic. While I in part translate the follow-
ing observations from a contemporary writer of the Continent, let
me be permitted to premise, that I might have transcribed the sub-


<page 88>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 87
stance from memoranda of my own, which were written many
years before his pamphlet was given to the world; and that I prefer
another's words to my own, partly as a tribute due to priority of
publication, but still more from the pleasure of sympathy, in a case
where coincidence only was possible.
Whoever is acquainted with the history of philosophy, during the
two or three last centuries, cannot but admit, that there appears to
have existed a sort of secret and tacit compact among the learned,
not to pass beyond a certain limit in speculative science. The
privilege of free thought, so highly extolled, has at no time been
held valid in actual practice, except within this limit; and not a
single stride beyond it has ever been ventured without bringing ob-
loquy on the transgressor. The few men of genius among the learned class, who actually did overstep this boundary, anxiously
avoided the appearance of having so done. Therefore, the true
depth of science, and the penetration to the inmost centre, from
which all the lines of knowledge diverge, to their ever distant cir-
cumference, was abandoned to the illiterate and the simple, whom
unstilled yearning, and an original ebulliency of spirit, had urged
to the investigation of the indwelling and living ground of all things.
These, then, because their names had never been inrolled in the
guilds of the learned, were persecuted by the registered livery-men
as interlopers on their rights and privileges. All, without distinc-
tion, were branded as fanatics and phantasts ; not only those whose
wild and exorbitant imaginations had actually engendered only extravagant and grotesque phantasms, and whose productions were,
for the most part, poor copies and gross caricatures of genuine in-
spiration; but the truly inspired likewise, the originals themselves!
And this for no other reason but because they were the unlearned
men of humble and obscure occupations. When, and from whom
among the literati by profession, have we ever heard the divine dox-
ology repeated, "I thank thee, O Father! Lord of Heaven and
Earth! because thou hast hid these things from the wise and pru-
dent, and hast revealed them unto babes?" No! the haughty
priests of learning not only banished from the schools and marts of
science all who had dared draw living waters from the fountain, but
drove them out of the very temple, which, mean time, " buyers and
sellers, and money-changers" were suffered to make "a den of
thieves."


<page 89>
88 6IOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
And yet it would not be easy to discover any substantia] ground
for this contemptuous pride in those literati, who have most distin-
guished themselves by their scorn of Behmen, De Thoyras,
George Fox, &c.; unless it be, that they could write orthograph-
ically, make smooth periods, and had the fashions of authorship
almost literally at their finger's ends, while the latter, in simplicity
of soul, made their words immediate echoes of their feelings.
Hence the frequency of those phrases among them, which have
been mistaken for pretences to immediate inspiration; as for in-
stance, "it was delivered unto me," "J strove not to speak," "J
said, I will be silent," " but the word was in my heart as a burning
fire," " and I could not forbear." Hence, too, the unwillingness to
give offence; hence the foresight, and the dread of the clamours
which would be raised against them, so frequently avowed in the
writings of these men, and expressed, as was natural, in the words
of the only book with which they were familiar. "Woe is me that
I am become aman of strife, and a man of contention—I love
peace: the souls of men are dear unto me: yet because I seek for
light, every one of them doth curse me!" O! it requires deeper
feeling, and a stronger imagination, than belong to most of those
to whom reasoning and fluent expression have been as a trade
learnt in boyhood, to conceive with what might, with what inward
strivings and commotion, the perception of a new and vital truth
takes possession of an uneducated man of genius. His medita-
tions are almost inevitably employed on the eternal, or the ever-
lasting; for "the world is not his friend, nor the world's law,"
'Need we then be surprised, that under an excitement at once so strong and so unusual, the man's body should sympathize with the
struggles of his mind; or that he should at times be so far deluded
as to mistake the tumultuous sensations of his nerves, and the co-
v—existing spectres of his fancy, as parts or symbols of the truths
which were opening on him 1 It has indeed been plausibly observ-
ed, that in order to derive any advantage, or to collect any intelli-
gible meaning, from the writings of these ignorant mystics, the reader must bring with him a spirit and judgment superior to that of the
writers themselves:
"And what hebrings, what needs he elsewhere seek?"
- Paradise Regained,

<page 90>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 89
—A sophism, which, I fully agree with Warburton, is unworthy of
Milton; how much more so of the awful person, in whose mouth
he has placed it? One assertion I will venture to make, as sug-
gested by my own experience, that there exists folios on the human
understanding, and the nature of man, which would have a far just-
er claim to their high rank and celebrity, if in the whole huge vol-
ume there could be found as much fulness of heart and intellect as
burst forth in many a simple page of George Fox, Jacob Beh-
men, and even of Behmen's commentator, the pious and fervid
William Law.
The feeling of gratitude which I cherish towards these men has
caused me to digress further than I had foreseen or proposed; but
to have passed them over in an historical sketch of my literary life
and opinions, would have seemed to me like the denial of a debt,
the concealment of a boon. For the writings of these mystics acted in no slight degree to prevent my mind from being imprisoned
within the.outline of any single dogmatic system. They contributed to keep alive the heart in the head; gave me an indistinct, yet stirring and working presentment, that all the products of the mere reflective faculty partook of death, and were as the rattling
twigs and sprays in winter, into which a sap was yet to be propelled J >from some root to which I had not penetrated, if they were to afford my soul either food or shelter. If they were too often a moving
cloud of smoke to me by day, yet they were always a pillar of fire
throughout the night, during my wanderings through the wilderness
of doubt, and enabled me to skirt, without crossing, the sandy des-
erts of utter unbelief. That the system is capable of being con-
verted into an irreligious Pantheism, I well know. The Ethics
of Spinoza may, or may not, be an instance. But, at no time could
I believe, that in itself, and essentially, it is incompatible with reli-
gion, natural or revealed; and now I am most thoroughly persua-
ded of the contrary. The writings of the illustrious sage of Kon-
igsberg, the founder of the Critical Philosophy, more than any
other work, at once invigorated and disciplined my understanding.
The originality, the depth, and the compression of the thoughts;
the novelty and subtlety, yet solidity and importance, of the distinc-
tions; the adamantine chain of the logic; and, I will venture to
add, (paradox as it will appear to those who have taken their notion
of Immanuel Kant, from Reviewers and Frenchmen,) the clear-
11

<page 91>
90 BI0GRAPH1A LITERARIA.
ness and evidence of the "Critique of the Pure Reason;" of
the "Judgment ;" of the" Metaphisical Elements of Natural
Philosophy," and of his "Religion within the bounds of
Pure Reason," took possession of me as with a giant's hand.
After fifteen years familiarity with them, I still read these and all
his other productions with undiminished delight and increasing ad-
miration. The few passages that remained obscure to me, after
due efforts of thought, (as the chapter on original apperception,)
and the apparent contradictions which occur, I soon found were
hints and insinuations referring to ideas, which Kant either did not
think it prudent to avow, or which he considered as consistently left
behind in a pure analysis, not of human nature in toto, but of the
speculative intellect alone. Here, therefore, he was constrained to
commence at the point of reflection, or natural consciousness:
while in his moral system he was permitted to assume a higher
ground (the autonomy of the will) as a postulate deducible from
the unconditional command, or (in the technical language of his
school) the categorical imperative, of the conscience. He had
been in imminent danger of persecution during the reign of the
late king of Prussia, that strange compound of lawless debauchery,
and priest-ridden superstition; and it is probable that he had little
inclination, in his old age, to act over again the fortunes and hair-
breadth escapes of Wolf. The expulsion of the first among Kant's
disciples, who attempted to complete his system, from the univer-
sity of Jena, with the confiscation and prohibition of the obnoxious
work, by the joint efforts of the courts of Saxony and Hanover,
supplied experimental proof, that the venerable old man's caution
was not groundless. In spite, therefore, of his own declarations,
I could never believe it was possible for him to have meant no
more by his Noumenon, or Thing in Itself, than his mere words
express; or, that in his own conception he confined the whole plas-
tic power to the forms of the intellect, leaving for the external
cause, for the materiale of our sensations, a matter without form,
which is doubtless inconceivable. I entertained doubts likewise,
whether, in his own mind, he even laid all the stress, which he ap-
pears to do, on the moral postulates.
An idea, in the highest sense of that word, cannot be conveyed
7 /but by a symbol; and, except in geometry, all symbols of necessity
involve an apparent contradiction. $wv*jse SuvdroifEv: and for those

<page 92>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA, 91
who could not pierce through this symbolical husk, his writings
were not intended. Questions which can not be fully answered
without exposing the respondent to personal danger, are not enti-
tled to a fair answer; and yet to say this openly, would in many
cases furnish the very advantage which the adversary is insidiously
seeking after. Veracity does not consist in saying, but in the in-
tention of communicating truth; and the philosopher who cannot
utter the whole truth without conveying falsehood, and at the same
time, perhaps, exciting the most malignant passions, is constrained
to express himself either mythically or equivocally. When Kant,
therefore, was importuned to settle the disputes of his commentators
himself, by declaring what he meant, how could he decline the hon-
ours of martyrdom with less offence than by simply replying, "I
meant what I said ; and at the age of near four score, I have some-
thing else, and more important to do, than to write a commentary
on my own works."
Fichte's Wissenschaftslehre, or Lore of Ultimate Science, was
to add the key-stone of the arch; and by commencing with an act,
instead of a thing or substance, Fichte assuredly gave the first mor-
tal blow to Spinozism, as taught by Spinoza himself; and supplied
the idea of a system truly metaphysical, and of a metaphysique tru-
ly systematic: (i. e. having its spring and principle within itself.)
But this fundamental idea he overbuilt with a heavy mass of mere
notions, and psychological acts of arbitrary reflection. Thus his
theory degenerated into a crude egoismus,* a boastful and hyper-
* The following burlesque on the Fichtean Egoismus may, perhaps, be amusing
to the few who have studied the system, and to those who are unacquainted with
it, may convey as tolerable a likeness of Fichte's idealism as can be expected from
an avowed caricature.
The categorical imperative, or the annunciation of the new Teutonic God,
ETOENKAIIIAN : aditbyrambic Ode, by Qderkopf Voh Klubstick, Gram-
marian, and Subrector in Gymnasio.****
Eu! Dei vices gerens, ipse Divus,
(Speak English, Friend!) the God Imperativus,
Here on this market-cross aloud I cry:
1,1,1! I itself I!
The form and the substance, the what and the why,
The when and the where, and the low and the high,
The inside and outside, the earth and the sky,
I, you, and he, and he, you and I, All souls and all bodies are I itself I!All I itself I!(Fools a truce with this startling!)
i/

<page 93>
93 BIOGRAPHIA UTERARIA.
etoic hostility to Nature, as lifeless, godless, and altogether un-
holy: while his religion consisted in the assumption of a mere or-
do ordinans, which we were permitted exoterice tr> call God; and
his ethics in an ascetic, and almost monkish mortification of the
natural passions and desires.
In Schelling's "Natur-Philosophie," and the "System des
transcendentalen Idealismus," I first found a genial coinci-
dence with much that I had toiled out for myself, and a powerful
assistance in what I had yet to do.
I have introduced this statement, as appropriate to the narrative
nature of this sketch; yet rather in reference to the work which I
have announced in a preceding page, than to my present subject.
It would be but a mere act of justice to myself, were I to warn my
future readers, that an identity of thought, or even similarity of
phrase will not be at all times a certain proof that the passage has
been borrowed from Schelling, or that the conceptions were origi-
nally learnt from him. In this instance, as in the dramatic lectures
of Schlegel to which I have before alluded, from the same motive
of self-defence against the charge of plagiarism, many of the most
striking resemblances; indeed, all the main and fundamental ideas,
were born and matured in my mind before I had ever seen a single
page of the German Philosopher; and I might, indeed, affirm with
truth, before the more important works of Schelling had been writ-
All my I! all my I!
He's a heretic dog who but adds Betty Martin!
Thus cried the God with high imperial tone:
In robe of stiffest state, that scoff'd at beauty,
A pronoun-verb imperative he shone— Then substantive and plural-singular grown,
He thus spake on: Behold in I alone
(For ethics boast a syntax of their own)
Or if in ye, yet as I doth depute ye,
In O! I, you, the vocative of duty!
I of the world's whole Lexicon the root!
Of the whole universe of touch, sound, sight,
The genitive and ablative to boot:
The accusative of wrong, the nom'native of right,
And in all cases the case absolute!
Self-construed, I all other moods decline:
Imperative, from nothing we derive us;
Yet as a super-postulate of mine,
Unconstrued antecedence I assign
To X, Y, Z, the God infinitivus!

<page 94>
BIOGRAPHIC LITERARIA. 93
ten, or at least made public. Nor is this coincidence at all to be
wondered at. We had studied in the same school; been disciplined
by the same preparatory philosophy, namely, the writings of Kant;
we had both equal obligations to the polar logic and dynamic phi-
losophy of Giordano Bruno; and Schelling has lately, and, as of re-
cent acquisition, avowed that same affectionate reverence for the
labours of Behmen, and other mystics, which I had formed at a
much earlier period. The coincidence of Schelling's system
with certain general ideas of Behmen, he declares to have been
mere coincidence; while my obligations have been more direct.
He needs give to Behmen only feelings of sympathy; while I owe
him a debt of gratitude. God forbid! that I should be suspected
of a wish to enter into a rivalry with Schelling for the honours so
unequivocally his right, not only as a great and original genius, but
as the founder of the Philosophy op Nature, and as the most
successful improver of the Dynamic System,* which, begun by
Bruno, was re-introduced (in a more philosophical form, and freed
from all its impurities and visionary accompaniments) by Kant;
in whom it was the native and necessary growth of his own sys- *It would be an act of high and almost criminal injustice to pass over in si-
lence the name of Mr. Richard Saumakez, a gentleman equally well known as
a medical man and as a philanthropist, but who demands notice on the present
occasion as the author of" A new System of Physiology," in two volumes octavo,
published 1797; and in 1812, of "An Examination of the natural and artificial Sys-
tems of Philosophy which now prevail," in one volume octavo, entitled, "The
Principles of physiological and physical science." The latter work is not quite
equal to the former in style or arrangement; and there is a greater necessity of
distinguishing the principles of the author's philosophy from his conjectures con-
cerning colour, the atmospheric matter, comets, &c. which, whether just or erro-
neous, are by no means necessary consequences of that philosophy. Yet even
in this department of this volume, which I regard as comparatively the inferior
work, the reasonings by which Mr. Saumarez invalidates the immanence of an
infinite power in any finite substance, are the offspring of no common mind; and
the experiment on the expansibility of the air is at least plausible and highly in- fenious. But the merit, which will secure both to the book and to the writer a
igh and honorable name with posterity, consists in the masterly force of reason-
ing, and the copiousness of induction, with which he has assailed, and (in my
opinion) subverted the tyranny of the mechanic system in physiology; establish-
ed not only the existence of final causes, but their necessity and efficiency in eve- iry system that merits the name of philosophical; and substituting life and pro- Igressive power, for the contradictory inert force, has a right to be known and re-
membered as the first instaurator of the dynamic philosophy in England. The
author's views, as far as concerns himself, are unborrowed and completely his
own, as he neither possessed, nor do his writings discover, the least acquaintance
with the works of Kant, in which the germs of philosophy exist, and his volumes
were published many years before the full development of these germs by Schel-
ling. Mr. Saumarez's detection of the Brunonian system was no light or ordina-
ry service at the time; and I scarcely remember in any work on any subject a
confutation so thoroughly satisfactory. It is sufficient at this time to have stated
the fact; as in the preface to the work, which I have already announced on the
Logos, I have exhibited in detail the merits of this writer and genuine philoso-
Sher, who needed only have taken his foundations somewhat deeper and wider to
ave superseded a considerable part of my labours.
J

<page 95>
94 BIOGRAPHIA LITERAItlA.
tem. Kant's followers, however, on whom (for the greater part)
their master's cloak had fallen, without, or with a very scanty por-
ition of, his spirit, had adopted his dynamic ideas only as a more
refined species of mechanics. With exception of one or two fun-
Jdamental ideas, which cannot be withheld from Fichte, to Schel-
ling we owe the completion, and the most important victories, of
this revolution in philosophy. To me it will be happiness and hon-
our enough, should I succeed in rendering the system itself intelli-
gible to my countrymen, and in the application of it to the most
awful of subjects for the most important of purposes. Whether a
work is the offspring of a man's own spirit, and the product of ori-
ginal thinking, will be discovered by those who are its sole legiti-
mate judges, by better tests than the mere reference to dates. For
readers in general, let whatever shall be found in this, or any fu-
ture work of mine, that resembles, or coincides with, the doctrines
of my German predecessor, though contemporary, be wholly attri-
buted to him: provided, that the absence of distinct references to
his books, which I could not at all times make with truth as de-
signating citations or thoughts actually derived from him, and
which, I trust, would, after this general acknowledgement, be su-
perfluous, be not charged on me as an ungenerous concealment or
intentional plagiarism. I have not indeed (eheu! res angusta do-
mi !) been hitherto able to procure more than two of his books,
viz: the first volume of his collected Tracts, and his System of
Transcendental Idealism; to which, however, I must add a small
pamphlet against Fichte, the spirit of which was to my feelings
painfully incongruous with the principles, and which (with the usu-
al allowance afforded to an antithesis) displayed the love of wisdom
rather than the wisdom of love. I regard truth as a divine ventril-
oquist: I care not from whose mouth the sounds are supposed to
proceed, if only the words are audible and intelligible. "Albeit, I
must confess to be half in doubt, whether I should bring it forth or
no, it being so contrary to the eye of the world, and the world so
potent in most men's hearts, that I shall endanger either not to be
regarded or not to be understood."—Milton: Reason of Church
Government.
And to conclude the subject of citation, with a cluster of cita-
tions, which, as taken from books not in common use, may contri-
bute to the reader's amusement, as a voluntary before a sermon.

<page 96>
BI0GRAPH1A LITE11ARIA. 95
"Dolet mihi quidem deliciis literarum inescatos subito jam homines
adeo esse, prasserlim qui Christianos se profitentur, et legere nisi
quod ad delectationem facit, sustineant nihil r unde et disciplines
severiores et philosophia ipsa jam fere prorsus etiam a doctis neg-
liguntur. Quod quidem propositum studiorum, nisi mature cor-
rigitur, tam magnum rebus incommodum dabit, quam dedit Barba-
ries olim. Pertinax res Barbaries est, fateor: sed minus potest tamen, quam ilia mollifies et persuasa prudentia literarum, quae si
ratione caret, sapientiae virtutisque specie mortales misere circum-
ducit. Succedet igitur, ut arbitror, haud ita multo post, pro rusti-
cana seculi nostri ruditate captatrix ilia communiloquentia robur
animi virilis omne, omnem virtutem masculam profligatura, nisi
cavetur."
Simon Gryn.s:us, candido lectori,prefixed to the Latin translation
of Plato, by Marsilius Ficinus. Lugduni, 1557. A too prophetic
remark, which has been in fulfilment from the year 1680 to the
present, 1815. JV. B. By " persuasa prudentia," Grynaeus means
self-complacent common sense as opposed to science and philosophic
reason. r
"Est medius ordo et velut equestris Ingeniorum quidem saga-
cium et rebus humanis commodorum, non tamen in primam mag-
nitudinem patentium. Eorum hominum, ut ita dicam, major an-
nona est. Sedulum esse, nihil temere loqui, assuescere labori, et
imagine prudentia? et modestia? tegere angustiores partes captus
dum exercitationem et usum, quo isti in civilibus rebus pollent, pro
natura et magnitudine ingenii plerique accipiunt."
Barclaii Argenis, p. 71.
"As, therefore, physicians are many times forced to leave such
methods of curing as themselves know to be fittest, and, being
over-ruled by the sick man's impatience, are fain to try the best
they can; in like sort, considering how the case doth stand with the
present age, full of tongue and weak of brain, behold we would,
(if our subject permitted it,) yield to the stream thereof. That
way we would be contented to prove our thesis, which, being the
worse in itself, notwithstanding, is now, by reason of common im-
becility, the fitter and likelier to be brooked."—Hooker.
If this fear could be rationally entertained in the controversial
age of Hooker, under the then robust discipline of the scholastic
logic, pardonably may a writer of the present times anticipate a

<page 97>
■ £
69 fe, B10GRAPHIA LITEKARIA.
scanty audience for abstrusest themes, and truths that can neither
be communicated nor received without effort of thought, as well as
patience of attention.
"Ches'io non erro al calcularde' punti,
Par eh' Asinini Stella a noi predomini,
E'l Somaro e'1 castron si sian congiunti.
Il tempo d'Apuleio piu non si nomini:
Che se allora un sol Huom sembrava un Asino,
Mille Asini a miei di rassembran Huomini 1"
Di Salvator Rosa, Satir. 1.1.10.

<page 98>
CHAPTER X.
A chapter of digression and anecdotes, as an interlude preceding that on the na-
ture and genesis of the imagination or plastic power—On pedantry and pedant-
ic expressions—Advice to young authors respecting publication—Various an-
ecdotes of the author's literary life, and the progress of his opinions in religion
and politics.
"Esemplastic. The word is not in Johnson, nor have 1 met
with it elsewhere." Neither have I! I constructed it myself from
the Greek words sis sv irXow-reiv, i. e. to shape into one; because, j */having to convey a new sense, I thought that a new term would both aid the recollection of my meaning, and prevent its being con-
founded with the usual import of the word imagination. "But this
is pedantry.'" Not necessarily-so, I hope. If I am not misin-
formed, pedantry consists in the use of words unsuitable to the time,
place, and company. The language of the market would be in the
schools as pedantic, though it might not be reprobated by that
name, as the language of the schools in the market. The mere
man of the world, who insists that no other terms but such as occur
in common conversation should be employed in a scientific disqui-
sition, and, with no greater precision, is as truly a pedant as the
man of letters, who, either over-rating the acquirements of his audi-
tors, or misled by his own familiarity with technical or scholastic
terms, converses at the wine-table with his mind fixed on his mu-
saeum or laboratory; even though the latter pedant, instead of de-
siring his wife to make the tea, should bid her add to the quant.
sufF. of thea sinensis the oxyd of hydrogen saturated with caloric.
To use the colloquial (and, in truth, somewhat vulgar) metaphor,
if the pedant of the cloister, and the pedant of the lobby, both smell
equally of the shop, yet the odour from the Russian binding of good
old authentic-looking folios and quartos, is less annoying than the
steams from the tavern or bagnio. Nay, though the pedantry
of the scholar should betray a little ostentation, yet a well-condi-
tioned mind would more easily, methinks, tolerate the fox brush of
learned vanity, than the sans culotterie of a contemptuous ignorance,
that assumes a merit from mutilation in the self-consoling sneer at
the pompous incumbrance of tails.
12

<page 99>
98 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
The first lesson of philosophic discipline is to wean the student's
attention from the degrees of things, which alone form the vocab-
ulary of common life, and to direct it to the kind, abstracted from
degree. Thus the chemical student is taught not to be startled at
disquisitions on the heat in ice, or on latent and fixible light. In
such discourse, the instructor has no other alternative than either
to use old words with new meanings, (the plan adopted by Darwin
in his Zoonomia,) or to introduce new terms, after the example of
Linnaeus, and the framers of the present chemical nomenclature.
The latter mode is evidently preferable, were it only that the for-
mer demands a two-fold exertion of thought in one and the same
act. For the reader (or hearer) is required not only to learn and
bear in mind the new definition, but to unlearn, and keep out of his
view, the old and habitual meaning; a far more difficult and per-
plexing task, and for which the mere semblance of eschewing pe-
dantry seems to me an inadequate compensation. Where, indeed,
it is in our power to recall an appropriate term that had, without
sufficient reason, become obsolete, it is doubtless a less 'evil to
restore than to coin anew. Thus, to express in one word all that
appertains to the perception considered as passive, and merely re-
cipient, I have adopted from our elder classics the word sensuous;
because sensual is not at present used except in a bad sense, or at
least as a moral distinction, while sensitive and sensible would each
convey a different meaning. Thus, too, I have followed Hooker,
Sanderson, Milton, &c. in designatiog^the immediateness of any
act orjobject of knowledge by the word intuition, used sometimes
subjectively, sometimes objectively, even as we use the word,
thought; now as the thought, or act of thinking, and now as a thought, or the object of our reflection: and we do this without con-
fusion or obscurity. The very words objective and subjective, of
such constant recurrence in the schools of yore, I have ventured to
reintroduce, because I could not so briefly, or conveniently, by any
more familiar terms, distinguish the percipere from the percipi.
Lastly, I have cautiously discriminated the terms, the reason, and
the understanding, encouraged and confirmed by the authority
of our genuine divines and philosophers, before the revolution:
"both life, and sense,
Fancy, and understanding: whence the soul
Reason receives, and reason is her being,

<page 100>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. -99
Discursive or intuitive. Discourse *
(s uftest your's, the latter most is our's, Differing but in degree, in kind the same."
Paradise Lost, Book V.
I say, that I was confirmed by authority so venerable; for I had
previous and higher motives in my own conviction of the impor-
tance, nay, of the necessity of the distinction, as both an indispensa-
ble condition and a vital part of all sound speculation in metaphy-
sics, ethical or theological. To establish this distinction was one main object of The Friend; if even in a biography of my own literary life I can with propriety refer to a work which was printed rather than published, or so published that it had been well for the
unfortunate author if it had remained in manuscript! I have even
at this time bitter cause for remembering that which a number of
my subscribers have but a trifling motive for forgetting. This ef-
fusion might have been spared; but I would fain flatter myself that
the reader will be less austere than an oriental professor of the
bastinado, who, during an attempt to extort per argumentum bacu-
linum a full confession from a culprit, interrupted his outcry of pain
by reminding him that it was " a mere digression!" All this noise,
Sir, is nothing to the point, and no sort of answer to my questions!
Ah! but (replied the sufferer) it is the most pertinent reply in nature
to your blows.
An imprudent man, of common goodness of heart, cannot but
wish to turn even his imprudences to the benefit of others, as far
as this is possible. If, therefore, any one of the readers of this
semi-narrative should be preparing or intending a periodical work,
I warn him, in the^first place, against trusting in the number of
names on his subscription list. For he cannot be certain that the
names were put down by sufficient authority; or should that be as-
certained, it still remains to be known, whether they were not ex-
torted by some over zealous friend's importunity; whether the sub-
scriber had not yielded his name merely from want of courage to
answer no! and with the intention of dropping the work as soon as
* But for sundry notes on Shakspeare, &c. which have fallen in my way, I
should have deemed it unnecessary to observe, that discourse here, or elsewhere,
does not mean what we now call discoursing; but the discursion of the mind, the 1 ./processes of generalization and subsumption, of deduction and conclusion. Thus j v
philosophy has hitherto been discursive, while Geometry is always, and essential- I
ly, INTUITIVE.

<page 101>
100 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
possible. One gentleman procured me nearly a hundred names
for The Friend, and not only took frequent opportunity to re-
mind me of his success in his canvas, but laboured to impress my
mind with the sense of the obligation I was under to the subscri-
bers; for (as he very pertinently admonished me) "fifty-two shil-
lings a year was a large sum to be bestowed on one individual,
where there were so many objects of charity with strong claims to
the assistance of the benevolent." Of these hundred patrons nine-
ty threw up the publication before the fourth number, without any
notice; though it was well known to them, that in consequence of
the distance, and slowness and irregularity of the conveyance, I
was compelled to lay in a stock of stamped paper for at least eight
weeks beforehand ; each sheet of which stood me in five pence pre-
vious to its arrival at my printer's; though the subscription money
was not to be received till the twenty-first week after the com-
mencement of the work; and lastly, though it was in nine cases
out of ten impracticable for me to receive the money for two or
three numbers, without paying an equal sum for the postage.
In confirmation of my first caveat, I will select one fact among
many. On my list of subscribers, among a considerable number
of names equally flattering, was that of an Earl of Cork, with his
address. He might as well have been an Earl of Bottle, for aught
I knew of him, who had been content to reverence the peerage in
abstracto, rather than in concretis. Of course, The Friend was
regularly sent as far, if I remember right, as the eighteenth number,
i. e. till a fortnight before the subscription was to be paid. And
lo! just at this time I received a letter from his lordship, reproving
me in language far more lordly than courteous, for my impudence
in directing my pamphlets to him, who knew nothing of me or my
work! Seventeen or eighteen numbers of which, however, his
lordship was pleased to retain, probably for the culinary or post-
culinary conveniences of his servants.
Secondly, I warn all others from the attempt to deviate from the
ordinary mode of publishing a work by the trade. I thought, in-
deed, that to the purchaser it was indifferent, whether thirty per
cent, of the purchase money went to the booksellers or to the gov-
ernment; and that the convenience of receiving the work by the
post at his own door would give the preference to the latter. It is
hard, I own, to have been labouring for years, in collecting and ar-

<page 102>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 101
ranging the materials; to have spent every shilling that could be
spared after the necessaries of life had been furnished, in buying
books, or in journies for the purpose of consulting them, or of ac-
quiring facts at the fountain head; then to buy the paper, pay for
the printing, &c. all at least fifteen per cent, beyond what the trade
would have paid; and then, after all, to give thirty per cent, not of
the nett profits, but of the gross results of the sale, to a man who
has merely to give the books shelf or warehouse room, and permit
his apprentice to hand them over the counter to those who may ask
for them; and this, too, copy by copy, although, if the work be on
any philosophical or scientific subject, it may be years before the
edition is sold off. All this, I confess, must seem a hardship, and
one to which the products of industry in no other mode of exertion
are subject. Yet even this is better, far better, than to attempt in
any way to unite the functions of author and publisher. But the
most prudent mode is to sell the copy-right, at least of one or more
editions, for the most that the trade will offer. By few, only, can
a large remuneration be expected; but fifty pounds and ease of
mind are of more real advantage to a literary man, than the chance
of five hundred, with the certainty of insult and degrading anxieties.
I shall have been grievously misunderstood, if this statement should
be interpreted as written with the desire of detracting from the char-
acter of booksellers or publishers. The individuals did not make
the laws and customs of their trade; but, as in every other trade,
take them as they find them. Till the evil can be proved to be
removable, and without the substitution of an equal or greater in-
convenience, it were neither wise nor manly even to complain of it.
But to use it as a pretext for speaking, or even for thinking, or feel-
ing, unkindly or opprobiously of the tradesmen, as individuals,
would be something worse than unwise or even than unmanly; it
would be immoral and calumnious! My motives point in a far
different direction, and to far other objects, as will be seen in the
conclusion of the chapter.
A learned and exemplary old clergyman, who many years ago
went to his reward, followed by the regrets and blessings of his
flock, published, at his own expense, two volumes octavo, entitled,
a new Theory of Redemption. The work was most severely
handled in the Monthly or Critical Review, I forget which; and
this unprovoked hostility became the good old man's favorite topic

<page 103>
102 BIOGRAFHIA LITERARIA.
of conversation among his friends. Well! (he used to exclaim,) in the second edition, I shall have an opportunity of exposing both
the ignorance and the malignity of the anonymous critic. Two or
three years, however, passed by without any tidings from the book-
seller, who had undertaken the printing and publication of the work,
and who was perfectly at his ease, as the author was known to be
a man of large property. At length the accounts were written for;
and in the course of a few weeks they were presented by the rider
for the house, in person. My old friend put on his spectacles, and
holding the scroll with no very firm hand, began—Paper, so much:
O, moderate enough—not at all beyond my expectation! Print-
ing, so much: Well! moderate enough! Stitching, covers, ad-
vertisements, carriage, fyc. so much: Still nothing amiss. Selle-
ridge, (for orthography is no necessary part of a bookseller's litera-
ry acquirements,) £3. 3s. Bless me! only three guineas for the
what d'ye call it? the selleridge? No more, Sir! replied the rider.
Nay, but that is too moderate! rejoined my old friend. Only three
guineas for selling a thousand copies of a work in two volumes 1
O, Sir! (cries the young traveller,) you have mistaken the word.
There have been none of them sold; they have been sent back
from London long ago; and this £3 3s. is for the cellaridge, or
warehouse-room in our book cellar. The work was in consequence
preferred from the ominous cellar of the publisher to the author's
garret; and on presenting a copy to an acquaintance, the old gen-
tleman used to tell the anecdote with great humour, and still great-
er good nature.
With equal lack of worldly knowledge, I was a far more than
equal sufferer for it, at the very outset of my authorship. Toward
the close of the first year from the time that, in an inauspicious
hour, I left the friendly cloisters, and the happy grove of quiet, ever
honoured Jesus College, Cambridge, I was persuaded by sundry
Philanthropists and Anti-polemists, to set on foot a periodical work,
entitled The Watchman, that (according to the general motto of
the work) all might know the truth, and that the truth might make
us free! In order to exempt it from the stamp tax, and likewise to
contribute as little as possible to the supposed guilt of a war against
freedom, it was to be published on every eighth day, thirty-two
pages, large octavo, closely printed, and price only four pence.
Accordingly, with a flaming prospectus, "Knowledge is Power,"

<page 104>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 103
4-c. to try the state of the political atmosphere, and so forth, I set off
on a tour 1o the north, from Bristol to Sheffield, for the purpose of
procuring customers, preaching by the way in most of the great
towns, as an! hireless volunteer, in a blue coat and white waistcoat,
that not a rag of the woman of Babylon might be seen on me.
For I was at that time, and long after, though a Trinitarian (i. e. ad
normam Platonis) in philosophy, yet a zealous Unitarian in religion;
more accurately, I was a psilanthropist, one of those who believe
our Lord to have been the real son of Joseph, and who lay the
main stress on the resurrection rather than on the crucifixion. 0!
never can I remember those days with either shame or regret.
For I was most sincere, most disinterested! My opinions were,
indeed, in many and most important points, erroneous; but my
heart was single. Wealth, rank, life itself, then seemed cheap to
me, compared with the interests of (what I believed to be) the truth,
and the will of my Maker. I cannot even accuse myself of having
been actuated by vanity; for in the expansion of my enthusiasm, I
did not think of myself at all.
My campaign commenced at Birmingham; and my first attack
was on a rigid Calvinist, a tallow chandler by trade. He was a tall
dingy man, in whom length was so predominant over breadth, that
he might almost have been borrowed for a foundery poker. 0 that
face! a face xar'sfjwpojiv! I have it before me at this moment. The
lank, black, twine-like hair, pingui nitescent, cut in a strait line
along the black stubble of his thin gunpowder eye brows, that look-
ed like a scorched after-math from a last week's shaving. His
coat collar behind in perfect unison, both of colour and lustre, with
the coarse yet glib cordage, that I suppose he called his hair, and
which, with a bend inward at the nape of the neck, (the only ap-
proach to flexure in his whole figure,) slunk in behind his waist-
coat; while the countenance, lank, dark, very hard, and with strong
perpendicular furrows, gave me a dim notion of some one looking
at me through a used gridiron, all soot, grease, and iron! But he
was one of the thorough bred, a true lover of liberty, and (I was
informed) had proved to the satisfaction of many, that Mr. Pitt was
one of the horns of the second beast in the Revelations, that spoke
like a dragon. A person, to whom one of my letters of recom-
mendation had been addressed, was my introducer. It was a new
event in my life, my first stroke in the new business I had undertai/

<page 105>
104 HI0CRAPIIIA LITERARIA.
ken of an author, yea, and of an author trading on his own account.
My companion, after some imperfect sentences, and a multitude of
hums and haas, abandoned the cause to his client; and I commen-
ced an harangue of half an hour to Phileleutheros, the tallow chand-
ler, varying my notes through the whole gamut of eloquence, from
the ratiocinative to the declamatory, and in the latter from the pa-
thetic to the indignant. I argued, I described, I promised, I pro-
phecied ; and beginning with the captivity of nations, I ended with
the near approach of the millenium, finishing the whole with some
of my own verses describing that glorious state, out of the Religious
Musings:
Such delights, As float to earth, permitted visitants!
When in some hour of solemn jubilee
The massive gates of Paradise are thrown
Wide open: and forth come in fragments wild
Sweet echoes of unearthly melodies,
And odours snatch'd from beds of Amaranth,
And they that from the chrystal river of life
Spring up on freshen'd wings, ambrosial gales!
Religious Musings, I. 356.
My taper man of lights listened with perseverant and praise-
worthy patience, though (as I was afterwards told on complaining
of certain gales that were not altogether ambrosial) it was amelting
day with him. And what, Sir, (he said, after a short pause) might
the cost be? Only four-pence, (0! howl felt the anti-climax,
the abysmal bathos of that four-pence !) only four-pence, Sir, each
number, to be published on every eighth day. That comes to a deal
of money at the end of a year. And how much did you say there
was to be for the money? Thirty-lwo pages, Sir! large octavo,
closely printed. Thirty and two pages! Bless me! why, except
what I does in a family way on the Sabbath, that's more than I
ever reads, Sir, all the year round! I am as great a one, as any
man in Brummagem, Sir! for liberty and truth, and all them sort
of things, but as to this, (no offence, I hope, Sir!) I must beg to
be excused.
So ended my first canvas; from causes that I shall presently
mention, I made but one other application in person. This took
place at Manchester, to a stately and opulent wholesale dealer in
cottons. He took my letter of introduction, and having perused it,


<page 106>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 105
measured me from head to foot, and again from foot to head, and
then asked if I had any bill or invoice of the thing; I presented my
prospectus to him; he rapidly skimmed and hummed over the first
side, and still more rapidly the second and concluding page; crush-
ed it within his fingers and the palm of his hand; then, most de-
liberately and significantly rubbed and smoothed one part against
the other ; and, lastly, putting it into his pocket, turned his back on
me with an " over-run with these articles !" and so, without another
syllable, retired into his counting-house; and, I can truly say, to
my unspeakable amusement.
This, I have said, was my second and last attempt. On return-
ing baffled from the first, in which I had vainly essayed to repeat
the miracle of Orpheus with the Brummagem patriot, I dined with
the tradesman who had introduced me to him. After dinner, he im-
portuned me to smoke a pipe with him, and two or three other illu-
minati of the same rank. I objected, both because I was engaged
to spend the evening with a minister and his friends, and because I
had never smoked except once or twice in my life time, and then
it was herb tobacco mixed with Oronooko. On the assurance,
however, that the tobacco was equally mild, and seeing, too, that
it was of a yellow colour, (not forgetting the lamentable difficulty I
have always experienced in saying no! and in abstaining from
what the people about me were doing,) I took half a pipe, filling the
lower half of the bowl with salt. I was soon, however, compelled
to resign it in consequence of a giddiness and distressful feeling in
my eyes, which, as I had drank but a single glass of ale, must, I
knew, have been the effect of the tobacco. Soon after, deeming
myself recovered, I sallied forth to my engagement, but the walk
and the fresh air brought on all the symptoms again, and I had
scarcely entered the minister's drawing room, and opened a small
pacquet of letters, which he had received from Bristol for me, ere I
sunk back on the sofa in a sort of swoon rather than sleep. Fortunately, I had found just time enough to inform him of the con-
fused state of my feelings, and of the occasion. For here and
thus I lay, my face like a wall that is white-washing, deathly pale,
and with the cold drops of perspiration running down it from my
forehead, while, one after another, there dropt in the different gen-
tlemen who had been invited to meet and spend the evening with
me, to the number of from fifteen to twenty. As the poison of to-
13

<page 107>
106 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
bacco acts but for a short time, I at length awoke from insensibili-
ty, and looked round on the party, my eyes dazzled by the candles
which had been lighted in the interim. By way of relieving my
embarrassment, one of the gentlemen began the conversation, with
"Have-you seen a paper to-day, Mr. Coleridge?" Sir! (I replied,
rubbing my eyes,) "I am far from convinced, that a Christian is
permitted to read either newspapers or any other works of merely
political and temporary interest. This remark, so ludicrously in-
apposite to, or, rather, incongruous with, the purpose for which I
was known to have visited Birmingham, and to assist me in which
they were all then met, produced an involuntary and general burst
of laughter; and seldom, indeed, have I passed so many delightful
hours, as I enjoyed in that room from the moment of that laugh
to an early hour the next morning. Never, perhaps, in so mixed
and numerous a party, have I since heard conversation sustained
with such animation, enriched with such variety of information, and
enlivened with such a flow of anecdote. Both then and afterwards,
they all joined in dissuading me from proceeding with my scheme;
assured me, in the most friendly, and yet most flattering expres-
sions, that the employment was neither fit for me, nor I fit for the
employment. Yet if I had determined on persevering in it, they
promised to exert themselves to the utmost to procure subscribers,
and insisted that I should make no more applications in person, but
carry on the canvas by proxy. The same hospitable reception,
the same dissuasion, and, (that failing,) the same kind exertions in
my behalf, I met with at Manchester, Derby, Nottingham, Shef-
field, indeed, at every place in which I took up my sojourn. I
often recall with affectionate pleasure the many respectable men
who interested themselves for me, a perfect stranger to them, not
a few of whom I can still name among my friends. They will bear
witness for me, how opposite even then my principles were to those
of jacobinism, or even of democracy, and can attest the strict accu-
racy of the statement which I have left on record in the 10th and
11th numbers of The Friend.
From this rememberable tour I returned with nearly a thousand
names on the subscription list of the "Watchman j yet more than
half convinced, that prudence dictated the abandonment of the
scheme. But for this very reason I persevered in it; for I was at
that period of my life so completely hag-ridden by the fear of being


<page 108>
BIOGRAPHIA LITEHARIA. 107
influenced by selfish motives, that to know a mode of conduct to be
the dictate of prudence, was a sort of presumptive proof to my feel-
ings, that the contrary was the dictate of duty. Accordingly, I
commenced the work, which was announced in London by long
bills, in letters larger than had ever been seen before, and which
(I have been informed, for I did not see them myself) eclipsed the
glories even of the lottery puffs. But, alas! the publication of the
very first number was delayed beyond the day announced for its
appearance. In the second number, an essay against fast days,
with a most censurable application of a text from Isaiah for its mot-
to, lost me near five hundred of my subscribers at one blow. In
the two following numbers I made enemies of all my Jacobin and
Democratic patrons; for disgusted by their infidelity, and their
adoption of French morals with French philosophy; and perhaps
thinking, that charity ought to begin nearest home; instead of
abusing the Government and the Aristocrats chiefly or entirely, as
had been expected of me, I levelled my attacks at "modern patri-
otism," and even ventured to declare my belief, that whatever the
motives of ministers might have been for the sedition (or as it was
then the fashion to call them, the gagging) bills, yet, the bills
themselves would produce an effect to be desired by all the true
friends of freedom, as far as they should contribute to deter men
from openly declaiming on subjects, the principles of which they
had never bottomed, and from " pleading to the poor and ignorant,
instead of pleading/or them." At the same time I avowed my con-
viction, that national education, and a concurring spread of the gos-
pel, were the indispensable condition of any true political ameliora-
tion. Thus, by the time the seventh number was published, I had
the mortification (but why should I say this, when, in truth, I cared
too little for any thing that concerned my worldly interests to be at
all mortified about it?) of seeing the preceding numbers exposed
in sundry old iron shops for a penny a piece. At the ninth num-
ber I dropt the work. But from the London publisher I could not
obtain a shilling; he was a and set me at defiance. From
other places I procured but little, and after such delays as rendered
that little worth nothing; and I should have been inevitably thrown
into jail by my Bristol printer, who refused to wait even for a month
for a sum between eighty and ninety pounds, if the money had not
been paid for me by a man by no means affluent, a dear friend
/

<page 109>
108 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
who attached himself to me from my first arrival at Bristol, who
has continued my friend with a fidelity unconquered by time or
even by my own apparent neglect; a friend from whom I never received an advice that was not wise, or a remonstrance that was not
gentle and affectionate.
Conscientiously an opponent of the first revolutionary war, yet
with my eyes thoroughly opened to the true character and impo-
tence of the favourers of revolutionary principles in England, prin-
ciples which I held in abhorrence (for it was part of my political
creed, that whoever ceased to act as an individual by making him-
'self a member of any society not sanctioned by his government, for-
feited the rights of a citizen)—a vehement anti-ministerialist, but
after the invasion of Switzerland a more vehement anti-gallican,
and still more intensely an anti-jacobin, I retired to a cottage at
Stowey, and provided for my scanty maintenance by writing verses
for a London Morning Paper. I saw plainly, that literature was
not a profession by which I could expect to live; for I could not
disguise from myself, that whatever my talents might or might not
be in other respects, yet they were not of the sort that could enable
me to become a popular writer; and that whatever my opinions
might be in themselves, they were almost equi-distant from all the
three prominent parties, the Pittites, the Foxites, and the Demo-
crats. Of the unsaleable nature of my writings I had an amusing
memento one morning from our own servant girl. For happening
to rise at an earlier hour than usual, I observed her putting an ex-
travagant quantity of paper into the grate in order to light the fire,
and mildly checked her for her wastefulness; la. Sir! (replied poor
Nanny,) why, it is only " Watchmen."
I now devoted myself to poetry and to the study of ethics and
psychology; and so profound was my admiration at this time of
Hartley's Essays on Man, that I gave his name to my first born.
In addition to the gentleman, my neighbour, whose garden joined
on to my little orchard, and the cultivation of whose friendship had
been my sole motive in choosing Stowey for my residence, I was
so fortunate as to acquire, shortly after my settlement there, an in-
valuable blessing in the society and neighborhood of one, to whom
I could look up with equal reverence, whether I regarded him as a
poet, a philosopher, or a man. His conversation extended to al-
most all subjects, except physics and politics; with the latter he

<page 110>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 109
never troubled himself. Yet neither my retirement nor my utter
abstraction from all the disputes of the day could secure me in
those jealous times from suspicion and obloquy, which did not stop
at me, but extended to my excellent friend, whose perfect inno-
cence was even adduced as a proof of his guilt. One of the many
busy sycophants* of that day (I here use the word sycophant in its
original sense, as a wretch who flatters the prevailing party by in-
forming against his neighbours, under pretence that they are ex-
porters of prohibited figs or fancies! for the moral application of
the term it matters not which)—one of these sycophantic law-mon-
grels, discoursing on the politics of the neighbourhood, uttered the
following deep remark:'"As to Coleridge, there is not so much
harm in him, for he is a whirlbrain that talks whatever comes up-
permost; but that !he is the dark traitor. You never heard
him say a syllable on the subject."
Now that the hand of Providence has disciplined all Europe in-
to sobriety, as men tame wild elephants, by alternate blows and
caresses; now that Englishmen of all classes are restored to their
old English notions and feelings, it will with difficulty be credited,
how great an influence was at that time possessed and exerted by
the spirit of secret defamation, (the too constant attendant on par- Ity zeal!) during the restless interim from 1793 to the commence- Iment of the Addington administration, or the year before the truce
of Amiens. For by the latter period the minds of the partizans,
exhausted by excess of stimulation, and humbled by mutual disap-
pointment, had become languid. The same causes that inclined
the nation to peace, disposed the individuals to reconciliation.
Both parties had found themselves in the wrong. The one had
confessedly mistaken the moral character of the revolution, and the
other had miscalculated both its moral and its physical resources.
The experiment was made at the price of great, almost we may say,
of humiliating sacrifices; and wise men foresaw that it would fail,
at least in its direct and ostensible object. Yet it was purchased
cheaply, and realized an object of equal value, and, if possible, of
still more vital importance. For it brought about a national una-
nimity, unexampled in our history since the reign of Elizabeth; and
Providence, never wanting to a good work when men have done
* 2vxzg (paivsiv, to show or detect figs, the exportation of which, from Attica,
was forbidden by the laws.

<page 111>
110 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
their parts, soon provided a common focus in the cause of Spain,
which made us all once more Englishmen, by at once gratifying
and correcting the predilections of both parties. The sincere re-
verers of the throne felt the cause of loyalty ennobled by its alli-
ance with that of freedom; while the honest zealots of the people
could not but admit that freedom itself assumed a more winning
form, humanized by loyalty, and consecrated by religious principle.
The youthful enthusiasts, who, flattered by the morning rainbow of
the French revolution, had made a boast of expatriating their
hopes and fears, now disciplined by the succeeding storms, and
sobered by increase of years, had been taught to prize and honour
the spirit of nationality as the best safeguard of national indepen-
dence, and this again as the absolute prerequisite and necessary
basis of popular rights.
If in Spain, too, disappointment has nipt our too forward expec-
tations, yet all is not destroyed that is checked. The crop was
perhaps springing up too rank in the stalk to kern well; and there
were, doubtless, symptoms of the Gallican blight on it. If super-
stition and despotism have been suffered to let in their wolvish
sheep to trample and eat it down even to the surface, yet the roots
remain alive, and the second growth may prove all the stronger
and healthier for the temporary interruption. At all events, to us
heaven has been just and gracious. The people of England did
their best, and have received their rewards. Long may we contin-
ue to deserve it! Causes, which it had been too generally the
habit of former statesmen to regard as belonging to another world,
are now admitted, by all ranks, to have been the main agents of
our success. "We fought from heaven; the stars in their courses
fought against Sisera." If, then, unanimity, grounded on moral
feelings, has been among the least equivocal sources of our nation-
al glory, that man deserves the esteem of his countrymen, even as
patriots, who devotes his life and the utmost efforts of his intellect
to the preservation and continuance of that unanimity by the dis-
closure and establishment of principle. For by these all opinions
must be ultimately tried; and (as the feelings of men are worthy
of regard only as far as they are the representatives of their fixed
opinions) on the knowledge of these, all unanimity, not accidental
and fleeting, must be grounded. Let the scholar who doubts this
assertion, refer only to the speeches and writings of Edmund

<page 112>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. HI
Burke, at the commencement of the American war, and compare
them with his speeches and writings at the commencement of the
French revolution. He will find the principles exactly the same, and the deductions the same; but the practical inferences almost
opposite, in the one case, from those drawn in the other; yet ia ■.
both equally legitimate, and in both equally confirmed by the re- I
suits. Whence gained he this superiority of foresight? Whence
arose the striking difference, and, in most instances, even the dis-
crepancy between the grounds assigned by him, and by those who
voted with him, on the same questions 1 How are we to explain
the notorious fact, that the speeches and writings of Edmund
Burke are more interesting at the present day than they were
found at the time of their first publication; while those of his illus-
trious confederates are either forgotten, or exist only to furnish
proofs that the same conclusion which one man had deduced scien-
tifically, may be brought out by another, in consequence of errors that luckily chanced to neutralize each other? It would be un-
handsome as a conjecture, even were it not, as it actually is, false
in point of fact, to attribute this difference to deficiency of talent on
the part of Burke's friends, or of experience, or of historical know-
ledge. Thesatisfactory solution is, that Edmund Burke possessed, and had sedulously sharpened, that eye which sees all things,
actions, and events, in relation to the laws that determine their existence, and circumscribe their possibility. He referred habitually
to principles. He wag_a_ scientific statesman; andVth£r£fo.r& a
seer. For every principle contains, in itself, the germs of a prophe-
cy; and as the prophetic power is the essential privilege of science,
so the fulfilment of its oracles supplies the outward and (to men in
general) the only test of its claim to the title. Wearisome as
Burke's refinements appeared to his parliamentary auditors, yet the
cultivated classes throughout Europe have reason to be thankful
that
he went on refining,
And thought of convincing, while they thought of dining.
Our very sign boards (said an illustrious friend to me) give evi-
dence that there has been a Titian in the world. In like manner,
not only the debates in parliament, not only our proclamations and
state papers, but the essays and leading paragraphs of our journals

<page 113>
112 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
are so many remembrancers of Edmund Burke. Of this the
reader may easily convince himself, if either by recollection or
reference he will compare the opposition newspapers at the com-
mencement and during the five or six following years of the French
revolution, with the sentiments, and grounds of argument assumed
in the same class of journals at present, and for some years past, t
Whether the spirit of jacobinism, which the writings of Burke
exorcised from the higher and from the literary classes, may not,
like the ghost in Hamlet, be heard moving and mining in the un-
derground chambers with an activity the more dangerous because
less noisy, may admit of a question. I have given my opinions on
this point, and the grounds of them, in my letters to Judge Fletch-
er, occasioned by his charge to the Wexford grand jury, and pub-
lished in the Courier. Be this as it may, the evil spirit of jealousy,
and with it the cerberean whelps of feud and slander no longer walk
their rounds in cultivated society.
Far different were the days to which these anecdotes have car-
ried me back. The dark guesses of some zealous quidnunc met
with so congenial a soil in the grave alarm of a titled Dogberry of
our neighbourhood, that a spy was actually sent down from the gov-
ernment pour surveillance of myself and friend. There must have
been not only abundance, but variety of these " honourable men,"
at the disposal of Ministers; for this proved a very honest fellow.
After three weeks' truly Indian perseverance in tracking us, (for we were commonly together,) during all which time seldom were
we-out of doors, but he contrived to be within hearing, (and all the
time utterly unsuspected: how, indeed, could such a suspicion
enter our fancies?) he not only rejected Sir Dogberry's request
that he would try yet a little longer, but declared to him his belief,
that both my friend and myself were as good subjects, for aught he
could discover to the contrary, as any in His Majesty's dominions.
He had repeatedly hid himself, he said, for hours together, behind
a bank at the sea-side, (our favourite seat,) and overheard our con-
versation. At first he fancied that we were aware of our danger;
for he often heard me talk of one Spy Nozy, which he was inclined
to interpret of himself, and of a remarkable feature belonging to
him; but he was speedily ^convinced that it was a man who had
made a bbok, and lived long ago. Our talk ran most upon books,
and we were perpetually desiring each other to look at this, and to

<page 114>
BIOGBAPHIA LITEEARIA. 113
listen to that; but he could not catch a word about politics. Once
he had joined me on the road; (this occurred as I was returning
home alone from my friend's house, which was about three miles
from my own cottage,) and passing himself off as a traveller, he
had entered into conversation with me, and talked, of purpose, in a
democrat way, in order to draw me out. The result, it appears,
not only convinced him that I was no friend of jacobinism, but (he
added) I had " plainly made it out to be such a silly as well as
wicked thing, that he felt ashamed, though he had only put it on."
I distinctly remembered the occurrence, and had mentioned it im-
mediately on my return, repeating what the traveller with his Bar-
dolph nose had said, with my own answer; and so little did I sus-
pect the true object of my " tempter ere accuser," that I expressed,
with no small pleasure, my hope and belief that the conversation
had been of some service to the poor misled malcontent. This in-
cident, therefore, prevented all doubt as to the truth of the report,
which, through a friendly medium, came to me from the master of
the village inn, who had been ordered to entertain the government
gentleman in his best manner, but, above all, to be silent concern-
ing such a person being in his house. At length he received Sir
Dogberry's commands to accompany his guest at the final inter-
view; and after the absolving suffrage of the gentleman honoured
with the confidence of ministers, answered, as follows, to the follow-
ing queries: D. Well, landlord \ and what do you know of the
person in question 1 L. I see him often pass by with maister
, my landlord, (i. e. the owner of the house,) and sometimes
with the new-comers at Holford; but I never said a word to him,
or he to me. D. But do you not know that he has distributed pa-
pers and hand-bills of a seditious nature among the common people?
L. No, your honour! I never heard of such a thing. D. Have you
not seen this Mr. Coleridge, or heard of his haranguing and talk-
ing to knots, and clusters of the inhabitants 1—What are you grin-
ning at, Sir I L. Beg your honour's pardon! but I was only
thinking how they'd have stared at him. If what I have heard be
true, your honour! they would not have understood a word he said.
When our vicar was here, Dr. L., the master of the great school, and
canon of Windsor, there was a great dinner party at maister 's;
and one of the farmers, that was there, told us that he and the doc-
tor talked real Hebrew Greek at each other for an hour together
14

<page 115>
114 BIOGRAPHIA LITERAKIA.
after dinner, D. Answer the question, Sir! Does he ever ha-
rangue the people 1 L. I hope your honour a'nt angry with me.
I can say no more than I know. I never saw him talking with
any one but my landlord, and our curate, and the strange gentle-
man. D. Has he not been seen wandering on the hills towards the
channel, and along the shore, with books and papers in his hand,
taking charts and maps of the country 1 L. Why, as to that, your
honour! I own, I have heard; I am sure I would not wish to say
ill of any body ; but it is certain that I have heard—D. Speak out,
man! don't be afraid, you are doing your duty to your king and
government. What have you heard? L. Why, folks do say,
your honour! as how that he is a poet, and that he is going to put
Quantock and all about here in print; and as they be so much to-
gether, I suppose that the strange gentleman has some consarn in
the business. So ended this formidable inquisition, the latter part
of which alone requires explanation, and, at the same time, entitles
the anecdote to a place in my literary life. I had considered it as
a defect in the admirable poem of the Task, that the subject, which
gives the title to the work, was not, and indeed could not be, car-
ried on beyond the three or four first pages, and that throughout the
r poem the connexions are frequently aukward, and the transitions
abrupt and arbitrary. I sought for a subject that should give equal
room and freedom for description, incident, and impassioned re-
flections on men, nature, and society, yet supply, in itself, a natural
connexion to the parts, and unity to the whole. Such a subject I
conceived myself to have found in a stream, traced from its source
in the hills among the yellow-red moss and conical glass-shaped
. tufts of Bent, to the first break or fall, where its drops became audible, and it begins to forma channel; thence to the peat and turf
barn, itself built of the same dark squares as it sheltered; to the
sheep-fold, to the first cultivated plot of ground, to the lonely cot-
tage and its bleak garden won from the heath; to the hamlet, the
villages, the market-town, the manufactories, and the sea-port. My
walks, therefore, were almost daily on the top of Quantock, and
among its sloping coombs. With my pencil and memorandum
book in my hand, I was making studies, as the artists call them,
and often moulding my thoughts into verse, with the objects and
imagery immediately before my senses. Many circumstances,
evil and good, intervened to prevent the completion of the poem,

<page 116>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 115
which was to have been entitled "The Brook." Had I finished
the work, it was my purpose, in the heat of the moment, to have
dedicated it to our then committee of public safety, as containing
the charts and maps, with which I was to have supplied the French
government in aid of their plans of invasion. And these, too, for
a tract of coast that, from Clevedon to Minehead, scarcely permits
the approach of a fishing boat!
All my experience, from my first entrance into life to the pre-
sent hour, is in favour of the warning maxim, that the man who op-
poses in toto the political or religious zealots of his age, is safer
from their obloquy, than he who differs from them in one or two
points, or, perhaps, only in degree. By that transfer of the feel-
ings of private life into the discussion of public questions, which is
the queen bee in the hive of party fanaticism, the partizan has more
sympathy with an intemperate opposite than with a moderate friend.
We now enjoy an intermission, and long may it continue! In ad-
dition to far higher and more important merits, our present bible
societies, and other numerous associations for national or charitable
objects, may serve perhaps to carry off the superfluous activity, and
fervour of stirring minds in innocent hyperboles and the bustle of
management. But the poison-tree is not dead, though the sap
may, for a season, have subsided to its roots. At least, let us not
be lulled into such a notion of our entire security, as not to keep
watch and ward, even on our best feelings. I have seen gross in-
tolerance shown in support of toleration; sectarian antipathy most
obtrusively displayed in the promotion of an undistinguishing com-
prehension of sects; and acts of cruelty, (I had almost said of
treachery,) committed in furtherance of an object vitally important
to the cause of humanity; and all this by men, too, of naturally
kind dispositions and exemplary conduct.
The magic rod of fanaticism is preserved in the very adyta of
human nature; and needs only the re-exciting warmth of a master
hand to bud forth afresh, and produce the old fruits. The horror
of the peasant's war in Germany, and the direful effects of the An-
abaptist's tenets, (which differed only from those of jacobinism by
the substitution of theological for philosophical jargon,) struck all
Europe for a time with affright. Yet little more than a century
was sufficient to obliterate all effective memory of these events.
The same principles, with similar, though less dreadful consequen-

<page 117>
116 B10GRAPHIA LITERARIA.
ces, were again at work, from the imprisonment of the first Charles
to the restoration of his son. The fanatic maxim of extirpating fa-
naticism by persecution, produced a civil war. The war ended in
the victory of the insurgents; but the temper survived, and Milton
had abundant grounds for asserting that "Presbyter was but Old
Priest writ large!" One good result, thank heaven! of this zeal-
otry was the re-establishment of the church. And now it might
have been hoped, that the mischievous spirit would have been
bound for a season, "and a seal set upon him that he might de-
ceive the nation no more." But no! The ball of persecution was
taken up with undiminished vigour by the persecuted. The same
fanatic principle, that under the solemn oath and covenant had turn-
ed cathedrals into stables, destroyed the rarest trophies of art and
ancestral piety, and hunted the brightest ornaments of learning and
religion into holes and corners, now marched under episcopal ban-
ners; and having first crowded the prisons of England, emptied its
whole vial of wrath on the miserable covenanters of Scotland,
(iajjjg's History of Scotland.—Walter Scott's Bard's Ballads, &c.)
A merciful Providence at length constrained both parties to join
against a common enemy. A wise government followed; and
the established church became, and now is, not only the brightest
example, but our best and only sure bulwark, of toleration! The
true and indispensable bank against a new inundation of persecuting
zeal—Esto perpetua!
A long interval of quiet succeeded; or, rather, the exhaustion
had produced a cold fit of the ague, which was symptomatized by in-
difference among the many, and a tendency to infidelity or scepti-
cism in the educated classes. At length those feelings of disgust
and hatred which, for a brief while, the multitude had attached to
the crimes and absurdities of sectarian and democratic fanaticism,
were transferred to the oppressive privileges of the noblesse, and
the luxury, intrigues, and favoritism of the continental courts. The
same principles, dressed in the ostentatious garb of a fashionable
philosophy, once more rose triumphant, and effected the French
revolution. And have we not, within the last three or four years,
had reason to apprehend, that the detestable maxims and corres-
pondent measures of the late French despotism had already be-
dimmed the public recollections of democratic phrenzy ; had drawn
off, to other objects, the electric force of the feelings which had

<page 118>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 117
massed and upheld those recollections; and that a favourable con-
currence of occasions was alone wanting to awaken the thunder,
and precipitate the lightning, from the opposite quarter of the po-
litical heaven? (See The Friend, p. 110.)
In part from constitutional indolence, which, in the veryhey-dey
of hope, I had kept my enthusiasm in check, but still more from
the habits and influences of a classical education and academic
pursuits, scarcely had a year elapsed from the commencement of
my literary and political adventures, before my mind sunk into a
state of thorough disgust and despondency, both with regard to the
disputes and the parties disputant. With more than poetic feeling
I exclaimed:
"The sensual and the dark rebel in vain,
Slaves by their own compulsion! In mad game
They break their manacles, to wear the name
Of freedom, graven on a heavier chain.
O liberty! with profitless endeavour,
Have I pursued thee many a weary hour;
But thou nor swell'st the victor's pomp, nor ever
Didst breathe thy soul informs of human power!
Alike from all, howe'er they praise thee
(Nor prayer nor boastful name delays thee)
From superstition's harpy minions
And factious blasphemy's obscener slaves,
Thou speedest on thy cherub pinions,
The guide of homeless winds, and playmate of the waves!"
France, a Palinodia.
I retired to a cottage in Somersetshire at the foot of Quantock, and devoted my thoughts and studies to the foundations of religion
and morals. Here I found myself all afloat. Doubts rushed in;
broke upon me "from the fountains of the great deep," and fell
"from the windows of heaven." The fontal truths of natural reli-
gion, and the books of Revelation, alike contributed to the flood;
and it was long ere my ark touched on an Ararat, and rested. The
idea of the Supreme Being appeared to me to be as necessarily im-
plied in all particular modes of being, as the idea of infinite space in all the geometrical figures by which space is limited. I was
pleased with the Cartesian opinion, that the idea of God is distin-
guished from all other ideas by involving its reality; but I was not
wholly satisfied. I began then to ask myself, what proof I had of
y

<page 119>
118 BI0GRAPHIA LITERARIA.
the outward existence of any thing? Of this sheet of paper, for in-
stance, as a thing in itself, separate from the phenomenon or im-
age in my perception. I saw, that in the nature of things, such
proof is impossible; and that of all modes of being, that are not ob-
jects of the senses, the existence is assumed by a logical necessity
arising from the constitution of the mind itself, by the absence of
all motive to doubt it, not from any absolute contradiction in the
supposition of the contrary. Still, the existence of a being, the
ground of all existence, was not yet the existence of a moral crea-
tor and governor. "In the position, that all reality is either con-
tained in the necessary being as an attribute, or exists through
him, as its ground, it remains undecided whether the properties of
intelligence and will are to be referred to the Supreme Being in the
former, or only in thelatter sense; as inherent attributes, or only
as consequences that have existence in other things through him.
Thus, organization and motion are regarded as from God, not in
God. Were the latter the truth, then, notwithstanding all the pre-
eminence which must be-assigned to the Eternal First from the
sufficiency, unity, and independence of his being, as the dread
ground of the universe, his nature would yet fall far short of that
which we are bound to comprehend in the idea of God. For with-
out any knowledge of determining resolve of its own, it would only
be a blind necessary ground of other things and other spirits; and
thus would be distinguished from the fate of certain ancient phi-
losophers in no respect, but that of being more definitely and in-
telligibly described." Kant's einzig moglicher Beweisgrund: ver-
mischte Schriften, Zweiter Band, § 102 and 103.
For a very long time, indeed, I could not reconcile personality
with infinity; and my head was with Spinoza, though my whole
heart remained with Paul and John. Yet there had dawned upon
me, even before I had met with the Critique of the Pure Reason,
a certain guiding light. If the mere intellect could make no cer-
tain discovery of a holy and intelligent first cause, it might yet sup-
ply a demonstration, that no legitimate argument could be drawn
from the intellect against its truth. And what is this more than St.
Paul's assertion, that by wisdom (more properly translated, by the
powers of reasoning) no man ever arrived at the knowledge of God 1
What more than the sublimest, and, probably, the oldest book on
earth, has taught us?

<page 120>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 119
Silver and gold man searcheth out:
Bringetb the ore out of the earth, and darkness into light.
But where findeth he wisdom 1
Where is the place of understanding?
The abyss crieth: it is not in me!
Ocean echoeth back: not in me!
Whence then cometh wisdom?
Where dwelleth understanding?
Hidden from the eyes of the living;
Kept secret from the fowls of heaven!
Hell and death answer:We have heard the rumour thereof from afar.
God marketh out the road to it;
God knoweth its abiding place!
He beholdeth the ends of the earth;
He surveyeth what is beneath the heavens!
And as he weighed out the winds, and measured the sea,
And appointed laws to the rain,
And a path to the thunder,
A path to the flashes of the lightning.' #
Then did he see it,
And he counted it;
He searched into the depth thereof,
And with a line did he compass it round!
But to man he said,
The fear of the Lord is wisdom for thee!
And to avoid evil,
That is thy understanding.
Job, Chap. 28th.
I became convinced, that religion, as both the corner-stone and
the key-stone of morality, must have a moral origin; so far at least,
that the evidence of its doctrines could not, like the truths of ab-
stract science, be wholly independent of the will. It were there-
fore to be expected, that its fundamental truth would be such as
might be denied; though only by the fool, and even by the fool
from the madness of the heart alone!
The question then concerning our faith in the existence of a
God, not only as the ground of the universe by his essence, but as
its maker and judge by his wisdom and holy will, appeared to stand
thus: The sciential reason, whose objects are purely theoretical,
V

<page 121>
120 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
remains neutral, as long as its name and semblance are not usurped
by the opponents of the doctrine. But it then becomes an effective
ally by exposing the false show of demonstration, or by evincing
the equal demonstrability of the contrary from premises equally lo-
gical. The understanding mean time suggests, the analogy of ex-
perience facilitates, the belief. Nature excites and recalls it, as
by a perpetual revelation. Our feelings almost necessitate it; and
the law of conscience peremptorily commands it. The arguments,
that at all apply to it, are in its favour ; and there is nothing against
it, but its own sublimity. It could not be intellectually more evi-
dent without becoming morally less effective; without counteract-
ing its own end, by sacrificing the life of faith to the cold mechan-
ism of a worthless, because compulsory assent. The belief of a
God and a future state (if a passive acquiescence may be flattered
with the name of belief) does not indeed always beget a good
heart; but a good heart so naturally begets the belief, that the very
few exceptions must be regarded as strange anomalies from strange
and unfortunate circumstances.
From these premises I proceeded to draw the following conclu-
sions: First, that having once fully admitted the existence of an
infinite yet self-conscious Creator, we are not allowed to ground
the irrationality of any other article of faith on arguments which
would equally prove that to be irrational which we had allowed to
be real. Secondly, that whatever is deducible from the admission
of a self-comprehending and creative spirit, may be legitimately
used in proof of the possibility of any further mystery concerning
the divine nature. Possibilitatem, mysteriorum, (Trinitatis, &c.,)
contra insultus Infidelium et Hereticorum a contradictionibus vin-
dico ; haud quidem veritatem, quae revelatione sola stabiliri possit;
says Leibnitz, in a letter to his Duke. He then adds the follow-
ing just and important remark: "In vain will tradition or texts of
scripture be adduced in support of a doctrine, donee clava impossi-
bilitatis et contradictionis e manibus horum Herculum extorta fue-
rit. For the heretic will still reply, that texts, the literal sense of
which is not so much above as directly against all reason, must be
understood figuratively, as Herod is a fox, &c."
These principles I held, philosophically, while, in respect of re-
vealed religion, I remained a zealous Unitarian. I considered the
idea of the Trinity a fair scholastic inference from the being of God,

<page 122>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 121
as a creative intelligence ; and that it was, therefore, entitled to the
rank of an esoteric doctrine of natural religion. But seeing in the
same no practical or moral bearing, I confined it to the schools of
philosophy. The admission of the logos, as hypostasized, (i. e.
neither a mere attribute or a personification,) in no respect remov-
ed my doubts concerning the incarnation and the redemption by the
cross; which I could neither reconcile in reason with the impas-
siveness of the Divine Being, nor, in my moral feelings, with the
sacred distinction between things and persons, the vicarious pay-
ment of a debt, and the vicarious expiation of guilt. A more tho-
rough revolution in my philosophic principles, and a deeper insight
into my own heart, were yet wanting. Nevertheless, I cannot
doubt, that the difference of my metaphysical notions from those of
Unitarians in general, contributed to my final re-conversion to the
whole truth in Christ i even as, according to his own confession,
the books of certain Platonic philosophers, (libri qtiorundam Pla-
tonicorum,) commenced the rescue of St. Augustine's faith from the
same error, aggravated by the far darker accompaniment of the
Manichaean heresy.
While my mind was thus perplexed, by a gracious Providence,
for which I can never be sufficiently grateful, the generous and mu-
nificent patronage of Mr. Josiah, and Mr. Thomas Wedgewood, enabled me to finish my education in Germany. Instead of troub-
ling others with my own crude notions and juvenile compositions,
I was thenceforward better employed in attempting to store my
own head with the wisdom of others. I made the best use of my
time and means j and there-is, therefore, no period of my life on
which I can look back with such unmingled satisfaction. After
acquiring a tolerable sufficiency in the German language * at
* To those who design to acquire the language of a country in the country it-
self, it may be useful if I mention the incalculable advantage which I derived
from learning all the words that could possibly be so learnt, with the objects be-
fore me, and without the intermediation of the English terms. It was a regular
part of my morning studies, for the first six weeks of my residence at Ratzeburg,
to accompany the good and kind old pastor with whom I lived, from the cellar to
the roof, through gardens, farm yards, &c, and to call every, the minutest, thing
by its German name. Advertisements, farces, jest books, and the conversation of
children while I was at play with them, contributed their share to a more home-
like acquaintance with the language than I could have acquired from works of
polite literature alone, or even from polite society. There is a passage of hearty
sound sense in Luther's German letter on interpretation, to the translation of
which I shall prefix, for the sake of those who read the German, yet are not like-
ly to have dipt often in the massive folios of this heroic reformer, the simple,
sinewy, idiomatic words of the original ~. "Dennman muss nicht die Buchstaben
in der Lateinischen Sprache fragen wie man soil Deutsch reden; sondern man
15

<page 123>
122 BI0GRAPH1A LITERAIUA.
Ratzeburg, which, with my voyage and journey thither, I have de-
scribed in The Friend, I proceeded through Hanover to Gottingen.
Here I regularly attended the lectures on physiology in the
morning, and on natural history in the evening, under Blumen-
bach, a name as dear to every Englishman who has studied at
that university, as it is venerable to men of science throughout Eu-
rope! Eichhorn's lectures on the New Testament were repeated
to me from notes, by a student from Ratzeburg, a young man of
sound learning and indefatigable industry; who is now, I believe,
a professor of the oriental languages at Heidelberg. But my chief
efforts were directed towards a grounded knowledge of the German
language and literature. From professor Tychsen, I received as
many lessons in the Gothic of Ulphilas as sufficed to make me ac-
quainted with its grammar, and the radical words of most frequent
occurrence; and with the occasional assistance of the same philo-
sophical linguist, I read through Ottfried's * metrical paraphrase
muss die mutter im Hause, die Kinder auf den Gassen, den gemeinen Mann auf
dem Markte, darum fragen: und denselbigen auf das Maul sehen wie sie reden,
und darnach dollmetschen. So verstehen sie es denn, und merken dass man
Deutsch mit ihnen redet."
Translation.
For one must not ask the letters in the Latin tongue, how one ought to speak
German; but one must ask the mother in the house, the children in the lanes and
alleys, the common man in the market, concerning this; yea, and look at the
mores of their mouths while they are talking, and thereafter interpret. They
understand you then, and mark that one talks German with them.
'* This paraphrase, written about the time of Charlemagne, is by no means de-
ficient in occasional passages of considerable poetic merit. There is a flow, and
a tender enthusiasm in the following lines, (at the conclusion of Chapter V.)
which even in the translation will not, I flatter myself, fail to interest the reader.
Ottfried is describing the circumstances immediately following the birth of our
liotd:'
She gave with joy her virgin breast;
She hid it not, she bared the breast,
Which suckled that divinest babe!
Blessed, blessed were the breasts
Which the Saviour infant kiss'd;And blessed, blessed was the mother
Who wrapp'd his limbs in swaddling clothes,
Singing placed him on her lap,
Hung o'er him with her looks of love,
And soothed him with a lulling motion.
Blessed! for she shelter'd him
From the damp and chilling air;
Blessed, blessed! for she lay
With such a babe in one blest bed,

<page 124>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
123
of the gospel, and the most important remains of the Theotiscan,
or the transitional state of the Teutonic language from the Gothic
to the old German of the Swabian period. Of this period (the pol-
ished dialect of which is analogous to that of our Chaucer, and
which leaves the philosophic student in doubt, whether the lan-
guage has not since then lost more in sweetness and flexibility,
than it has gained in condensation and copiousness) I read with
sedulous accuracy the Minnesinger, (or singers of love, the pro-
vencal poets of the Swabian court,) and the metrical romances;
and then laboured through sufficient specimens of the master singers,
their degenerate successors; not, however, without occasional
pleasure from the rude yet interesting strains of Hans Sachs, the
cobler of Nuremberg. Of this man's genius, five folio volumes,
with double columns, are extant in print, and nearly an equal num-
ber in manuscript; yet, the indefatigable bard takes care to inform
his readers, that he never made a shoe the less, but had virtuously
reared a large family by the labour of his hands.
In Pindar, Chaucer, Dante, Milton, &c. &c. we have instances
of the close connexion of poetic genius with the love of liberty and
of genuine reformation. The moral sense at least will not be out-
raged, if I add to the list the name of this honest shoemaker; (a
trade, by the bye, remarkable for the production of philosophers
and poets.) His poem entitled the Morning Star, was the very
first publication that appeared in praise and support of Luther;
and an excellent hymn of Hans Sachs', which has been deservedly
translated into almost all the European languages, was commonly
sung in the Protestant churches, whenever the heroic reformer vis-
ited them.
Close as babes and mothers lie!
Blessed, blessed evermore;
With her virgin lips she kiss'd,
With her arms, and to her breast
She embraced the babe divine,
Her babe divine the virgin mother!
There lives not on this ring of earth
A mortal, that can sing her praise.
Mighty mother, virgin pure,
In the darkness and the night
For us she bore the heavenly Lord!
Most interesting is it to consider the effect, when the feelings are wrought
above the naturalpitch by the belief of something mysterious, while all the ima-
ges are purely natural. Then it is that religion and poetry strike deepest.

<page 125>
124 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
In Luther's own German writings, and eminently in his transla-
tion of the bible, the German language commenced. I mean the
language, as it is at present written; that which is called the High
German, as contra-distinguished from the Platt-Teutsch, the
dialect of the flat or northern countries, and from the Ober-
Teutsch, the language of the middle and southern Germany. The
High German is indeed a lingua communis not actually the native
language of any province, but the choice and fragrancy of all the
dialects. From this cause it is at once the most copious and the
most grammatical of all the European tongues.
Within less than a century after Luther's death, the German was
inundated with pedantic barbarisms. A few volumes of this period
I read through from motives of curiosity; for it is not easy to ima-
gine any thing more fantastic than the very appearance of their pa-
ges. Almost every third word is a Latin word, with a Germanized
ending; the Latin portion being always printed in Roman letters, while in the last syllable the German character is retained.
At length, about the year 1620, Opitz arose, whose genius more
nearly resembled that of Dryden than any other poet, who at pre-
sent occurs to my recollection. In the opinion of Lessing, the
most acute of critics, and of Adelung, the first of lexicographers,
Opitz, and the Silesian poets, his followers, not only restored the
language, but still remain the models of pure diction. A stranger
has no vote -on. siiqh a question; but after repeated perusals of the
work, my feelings justified,{he verdict, and I seemed to have ac-
quired from them a sort of tact for what is genuine in the style of
later writers.
Of the splendid era which commenced with Gellert, Klopstock,
Ramler, Lessing, and their compeers, I need not speak. With the
opportunities which I enjoyed, it would have been disgraceful not
to have been familiar with their writings; and I have already said
as much as the present biographical sketch requires concerning the
German philosophers, whose works, for the greater part, I became
acquainted with at a far later period.
Soon after my return from Germany, I was solicited to undertake
the literary and political department in the Morning Post; and I
acceded to the proposal, on the condition that the paper should,
thenceforward, be conducted on certain fixed and announced prin-
ciples, and that I should be neither obliged or requested to deviate

<page 126>
BIOGRAPHJA LITERARIA. 125
from them, in favour of any party or any event. In consequence,
that Journal became, and for many years continued, anti-ministerial
indeed; yet, with a very qualified approbation of the opposition,
and with far greater earnestness and zeal, both anti-jacobin and
anti-gallican. To this hour, I cannot find reason to approve of
the first war, either in its commencement or its conduct. Nor can
I understand with what reason, either Mr. Percival, (whom I am
singular enough to regard as the best and wisest minister of this
reign,) or the present administration, can be said to have pursued
the plans of Mr. Pitt. The love of their country, and perseverant
hostility to French principles and French ambition are, indeed,
honourable qualities, common to them and to their predecessors.
But it appears to me as clear as the evidence of facts can render
any question of history, that the successes of the Percival and of
the existing ministry, have been owing to their having pursued
measures the direct contrary to Mr. Pitt's. Such, for instance,
are the concentration of the national force to one object; the aban-
donment of the subsidizing policy, so far, at least, as neither to
goad or bribe the continental courts into war, till the convictions of
their subjects had rendered it a war of their own seeking; and above
all, in their manly and generous reliance on the good sense of the
English people, and on that loyalty which is linked to the very
heart* of the nation, by the system of credit, and the interdepen-
dence of property.
•Lord Grenville has lately re-asserted, (in the House of Lords,) the imminent
danger of a revolution in the earlier part of the war against France. 1 donbt not
that bis Lordship is sincere; and it must be flattering to his feelings to believe it.
But where are the evidences of the danger, to which a future historian can ap-
peal? Or must he rest on an assertion 1 Let me be permitted to extract a pas-
sage on the subject from The Friend. "I have said that to withstand the argu-
ments of the lawless, the anti-jacobins proposed to suspend the law, and by the
interposition of a particular statute, to eclipse the blessed light of the universal
sun, that spies and informers might tyrannize and escape in the ominous dark-
ness. Oh! if these mistaken men, intoxicated and bewildered with the panic of
property, which they themselves were the chief agents in exciting, had ever
lived in a country where there really existed a general disposition to change and
rebellion! Had they ever travelled through Sicily; or through France at the
first coming on of the revolution; or even, alas! through too many of the provin-
ces of a sister island, they could not but have shrunk from their own declarations"
concerning the state of feeling, an opinion at that time predominant throughout
Great Britain. There was a time, (heaven grant that that time may have passed
by!) when, by crossing a narrow strait, tbey might have learnt the true symp-
toms of approaching danger, and have secured themselves from mistaking the
meetings and idle rant of such sedition, as shrunk appalled from the sight of a
constable, for the dire murmuring and strange consternation which precedes the
storm or earthquake of national discord. Not only in coffee-houses and public
theatres, but even at the tables of the wealthy, they would have heard the advo-
cates of existing government defend their cause in the language, and with the
tone of men, who are conscious that they are in a minority. But in England

<page 127>
126 BiOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
Be this as it may, I am persuaded that the Morning Post proved
a far more useful ally to the government in its most important ob-
jects, in consequence of its being generally considered as mode-
rately anti-ministerial, than if it had been the avowed eulogist of
Mr. Pitt. (The few, whose curiosity or fancy should lead them to
turn over the Journals of that date, may find a small proof of this
in the frequent charges made by the Morning Chronicle, that such
and such essays or leading paragraphs had been sent from the
treasury.) The rapid and unusual increase in the sale of the
Morning Post, is a sufficient pledge that genuine impartiality, with
a respectable portion of literary talent, will secure the success of a
newspaper, without the aid of party or ministerial patronage. But
by impartiality I mean an honest and enlightened adherence to a
code of intelligible principles, previously announced, and faithfully
referred to, in support of every judgment on men and events; not
indiscriminate abuse, not the indulgence of an editor's own malig-
nant passions; and still less, if that be possible, a determination to
make money by flattering the envy and cupidity, the vindictive rest-
lessness and self-conceit of the half-witted vulgar; a determination
almost fiendish, but which, I have been informed, has been boast-
fully avowed by one man, the most notorious of these mob-syco-
phants! From the commencement of the Addington administrawhen the alarm was at its highest, there was not a city, no, not a town or village, in which a man suspected of holding democratic principles could move abroad
without reciving some unpleasant proof of the hatred in which his supposed
opinions were held by the great majority of the people; and the only instances of
jonular excess and indignation, were in favour of the government and the estab-
ished church. But why need t appeal to these invidious facts? Turn over the
pages of history, and seek fora single instance of a revolution having been effect-
ed without the concurrence of either the nobles, or the ecclesiastics, or the moni-
ed classes, in any country in which the influences of property had everbeen pre-
dominant, and where the interests of the proprietors were interlinked! Examine
the revolution of the Belgic provinces under Philip 2nd; the civil wars of France
in the preceding generation; the history of the American revolution, or the yet
more recent events in Sweden and in Spain; and it will be scarcely possible not
to perceive, that in England, from 1791 to the peace of Amiens, there were nei-
ther tendencies to confederacy, nor actual confederacies, against which the exist-
ing laws had not provided sufficient safeguards and an ample punishment. But
alas! the panic of property had been struck, in the first instance, for party pur-
poses; and when it became general, its propagators caught it themselves, and
ended in believing their own lie; even as our bulls in Borrowdale sometimes run
mad with the echo of their own bellowing. The consequences were most inju-
rious. Our attention was concentrated to a monster, which could not survive the
convulsions in which it had been brought forth: even the enlightened Burke
himself, too often talking and reasoning, as if a perpetual and organized anarchy
had been a possible thing! Thus, while we were warring against French doc-
trines, we took little heed whether the means, by which we attempted to over-
throw them, were not likely to aid and augment the far more formidable evil of
French ambition. Like children, we ran away from the yelping of a cur, and
took shelter at the heels of a vicious war-horse."
?■'
ll:

<page 128>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 127
tion to the present day, whatever I have written in the Morning
Post, or, (after that paper was transferred to other proprietors,) in
the Courier, has been in defence or furtherance of the measures
of government.
Things of this nature scarce survive the night
That gives them birth; they perish in the sight,
Cast by so far from after-life, that there
Can scarcely aught be said, but that they were!
Cartwright's Prol. to the Royal Slave.
Yet in these labours I employed, and, in the belief of partial
friends, wasted, the prime and manhood of my intellect. Most
assuredly, they added nothing to my fortune or my reputation.
The industry of the week supplied the necessities of the week.
From Government or the friends of Government I not only never
received remuneration, or even expected it; but I was never hon-
oured with a single acknowledgment, or expression of satisfaction.
Yet the retrospect is far from painful or matter of regret. I am
not indeed silly enough to take, as any thing more than a violent
hyperbole of party debate, Mr. Fox's assertion, that the late war
(I trust that the epithet is not prematurely applied) was a war pro-
duced by the Morning Post; or I should be proud to have the
words inscribed on my tomb. As little do I regard the circum-
stance, that I was a specified object of Bonaparte's resentment
during my residence in Italy, in consequence of those essays in
the Morning Post, during the peace of Amiens. (Of this I was
warned, directly, by Baron Von Humboldt, the Prussian Pleni-
potentiary, who at that time was the minister of the Prussian court
at Rome; and indirectly, through his secretary, Cardinal Fesch
himself.) Nor do I lay any greater weight on the confirming fact,
that an order for my arrest was sent from Paris, from which danger
I was rescued by the kindness of a noble Benedictine, and the gra-
cious connivance of that good old man, the present Pope. For
the late tyrant's vindictive appetite was omnivorous, and preyed
equally on a Due D'Enghien,* and the writer of a newspaper para-
*I seldom think of the murder of this illustrious Prince without recollecting
the lines of Valerius Flaccus (Argonaut. Lib. I. 30.)
-Super ipsius ingens
Instat fama viri, virtusque haud laeta Tyranno;
Ergo ante ire metus, juvenemque extinguere pergit.

<page 129>
/
128 BIOGRAPHIA UTERARIA.graph. Like a true vulture,* Napoleon, with an eye not less tel-
escopic, and with a taste equally coarse in his ravin, could descend
from the most dazzling heights to pounce on the leveret in the brake,
or even on the field mouse amid the grass. But I do derive a grat-
ification from the knowledge, that my essays contributed to intro-
duce the practice of placing the questions and events of the day in
a moral point of view; in giving a dignity to particular measures,
by tracing their policy or impolicy to permanent principles; and an
interest to principles by the application of them to individual meas-
ures. In Mr._Burke's writings, indeed, the germs of almost all
political truths may be found. But I dare assume to myself the
merit of having first explicitly defined and analized the nature of
Jacobinism; and that in distinguishing the jacobin from the republican, thejemocrat and the mere demagogue, I both rescued the
word from remaining a mere term of abuse, and put on their guard many honest minds, who even in their heat of zeal against jacobin-
ismj_admitted_or supported principles from which the worst parts
of that systemjnayj)e legitimately deduced. That these are not
necessary practical results of such principles, we owe to that fortu-
nate inconsequence of our nature, which permits the heart to rectify
the errors of the understanding. The detailed examination of the
consular government and its pretended constitution, and the proof
given by me, that it was a consummate despotism in masquerade,
extorted a recantation even from the Morning Chronicle, which had
previously extolled this constitution as the perfection of a wise and
regulated liberty. On every great occurrence, I endeavoured to
discover in past history the event that most nearly resembled it. I
procured, wherever it was possible, the contemporary historians,
memorialists, and.pamphleteers. Then fairly subtracting the points
of difference from those of likeness, as the balance favoured the
former or the latter, I conjectured that the result would be the same
or different. In the series of essays,| entitled, "a comparison of
* ®rjja 8£ xai rev jfSjva xou r^v Aot»ca5a,
Kai <rov Aayuov, xai to twv Tavguv yivog.
Phile de animal, propriet.
t A small selection from the numerous articles furnished by me to the Morning
Post and Courier, chiefly as they regarded the sources and effects of jacobinism,
and the connection of certain systems of political economy with Jacobinical des-
potism, will form part of " The Friend," which I am now completing, and which

<page 130>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERAKIA. 129
France under Napoleon with Rome under the first Caesars," and
in those which followed "on the probable final restoration of the
Bourbons," I feel myself authorized to affirm, by the effect pro-
duced on many intelligent men, that were the dates wanting, it
might have been suspected that the essays had been written within
the last twelve months. The same plan I pursued at the com-
mencement of the Spanish revolution, and with the same success,
taking the war of the United Provinces with Philip 2nd, as the ground work of the comparison. I have mentioned this from no
motives of vanity, nor even from motives of self-defence, which
would justify a certain degree of egotism, especially if it be con-
sidered how often and grossly I have been attacked for sentiments
which I had exerted my best powers to confute and expose, and
how grievously these charges acted to my disadvantage while I
was in Malta. Or, rather, they would have done so, if my own
feelings had not precluded the wish of a settled establishment in
that island. But I have mentioned it from the full persuasion that,
armed with the two-fold knowledge of history and the human mind,
a man will scarcely err in his judgment concerning the sum total
of any future national event, if he have been able to procure the
original documents of the past, together with authentic accounts of
the present, and if he have a philosophic tact for what is truly im-
portant in facts, and in most instances, therefore, for such facts as
the dignity of history has excluded from the volumes of our
modern compilers, by the courtesy of the age, entitled historians.
To have lived in vain must be a painful thought to any man, and
especially so to him who has made literature his profession. I
should therefore rather condole, than be angry, with the mind which
could attribute to no worthier feelings than those of vanity or self-
love, the satisfaction which I acknowledge to have enjoyed from
the re-publication of my political essays (either whole oras extracts)
not only in many of our own provincial papers, but in the federal
journals throughout America. I regarded it as some proof of my not
having laboured altogether in vain, that from the articles written by
me shortly before, and at the commencement of the late unhappy
will be shortly published, for I can scarcely say re-published, with the numbers
Arranged in Chapters according to their subjects.
Accipe principium rursus, corpusque coaclam
Dcsere; mutata melior precede figura,
16

<page 131>
130 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
war with America, not only the sentiments were adopted, but, in
some instances, the very language, in several of the Massachusetts
state-papers.
But no one of these motives, nor all conjointly, would have im-
pelled me to a statement so uncomfortable to my own feelings, had
not my character been repeatedly attacked, by an unjustifiable in-
trusion on private life, as of a man incorrigibly idle, and who, in-
trusted not only with ample talents, but favoured with unusual op-
portunities of improving them, had nevertheless suffered them to
rust away without any efficient exertion either for his own good or
that of his fellow creatures. Even if the compositions which I
have made public, and that too in a form the most certain of an ex-
tensive circulation, though the least flattering to an author's self-
love, had been published in books, they would have filled a respect-
able number of volumes, though every passage of merely tempora-
ry interest were omitted. My prose writings have been charged
with a disproportionate demand on the attention; with an excess of
refinement in the mode of arriving at truths; with beating the
ground for that which might have been run down by the eye; with
the length and laborious construction of my periods; in short, with
obscurity and the love of paradox. But my severest critics have
not pretended to have found in my compositions triviality, or traces
of a mind that shrunk from the toil of thinking. No one has
charged me with tricking out in other words the thoughts of others,
or with hashing up anew the crambe jam decies coctam of English
literature or philosophy. Seldom have I written that in a day, the
acquisition or investigation of which had not cost me the previous
labour of a month.
But are books the only channel through which the stream of in-
tellectual usefulness can flow? Is the diffusion of truth to be esti-
mated by publications; or publications by the truth which they dif-
fuse, or at least contain? I speak it in the excusable warmth of a
mind stung by an accusation which has not only been advanced in
reviews of the widest circulation, not only registered in the bulkiest
works of periodical literature, but, by frequency of repetition, has
become an admitted fact in private literary circles, and thoughtless-
ly repeated by too many who call themselves my friends, and
whose own'recollections ought to have suggested a contrary testi-
mony. Would that the criterion of a scholar's utility were the

<page 132>
BIOGHAPHIA LITERARIA. 131
number and moral value of the truths which he has been the means
of throwing into the general circulation; or the number and value
of the minds, whom, by his conversation or letters, he has excited
into activity, and supplied with the germs of their aftergrowth! A
distinguished rank might not, indeed, even then, be awarded to my
exertions, but I should dare look forward with confidence to an
honourable acquittal. I should dare appeal to the numerous and
respectable audiences which, at different times, and in different
places, honoured my lecture-rooms with their attendance, whether
the points of view from which the subjects treated of were survey-
ed, whether the grounds of my reasoning were such as they had
heard or read elsewhere, or have since found in previous publica-
tions. I can conscientiously declare, that the complete success of the Remorse on the first night of its representation, did not give
me as great or as heart-felt a pleasure, as the observation that the
pit and boxes were crowded with faces familiar to me, though of
individuals whose names I did not know, and of whom I knew no-
thing, but that they had attended one or other of my courses of lec-
tures. It is an excellent, though perhaps somewhat vulgar proverb,
that there are cases where a man may be as well "in for a pound
as for a penny." To those, who from ignorance of the'serious in-
jury I have received from this rumour of having dreamt away my
life to no purpose, injuries which I unwillingly remember at all,
much less am disposed to record in a sketch of my literary life; or
to those, who from their ownTeelings, or the gratification they de-
rive from thinking contemptuously of others, would, like Job's com-
forters, attribute these complaints, extorted from me by the sense
of wrong, to self-conceit or presumptuous vanity, I have already
furnished such ample materials, that I shall gain nothing by with-
holding the remainder. I will not, therefore, hesitate to ask the
consciences of those, who, from their long acquaintance with me
and with the circumstances, are best qualified to decide, or be my
judges, whether the restitution of the suum cuique would increase
or detract from my literary reputation. In this exculpation, I hope
to be understood as speaking of myself comparatively, and in pro-
portion to the claims which others are entitled to make on my time
or my talents. By what I have effected, ami to be judged by my
fellow men; what I could have done, is a question for my own con-
science. On my own account I may perhaps have had sufficient


<page 133>
132 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
reason to lament my deficiency in self-controul, and the neglect of
concentreing my powers to the realization of some permanent work.
But to verse rather than to prose, if to either, belongs the voice of
mourning; for
Keen pangs of love awakening as a babe,
Turbulent, with an outcry in the heart,
And fears self-will'd that shunn'd the eye of hope,
And hope that scarce would know itself from fear;
Sense of past youth, and manhood come in vain,
And genius given and knowledge won in vain,
And all which I had cull'd in wood-walks wild,
And all which patient toil had rear'd, and all .
Commune with thee had open'd out—but flowers
Strew'd on my corpse, and borne upon my bier
In the same coffin, for the self same grave! S. T. C.
These will exist, for the future, I trust, only in the poetic strains
which the feelings at the time called forth. In those only, gentle
reader,
Affectus animi varios, bellumque sequacis
PerlegU invidise; curasque revolvis inanes; .. .' ,Quas humilis tenero stylus olim effudit in sevo.
Perlegis et lacrymas, et quod pharetratus acuta
Me puer puero fecit mihi cuspide vulnus. Omnia padlatim consumit longiob jetas
vlvesdo0.be slmul mok1hcb rapimuko.ce manendo.
Ipse mihi collatus enim non ille videbor; Frons alia est, moresque alii, nova mentis imago, Vox aliudque sonat. Jamque observatio vibe
Multa dedit:—lugere nihil, ferre omnia; jamque Paulatim lacrymas rerum experientia tersit.

<page 134>
CHAPTER XI.
An affectionate exhortation to those who in early life feel themselves disposed to
become authors.
It was a favourite remark of the late Mr. Whitbread, that no
man does any thing from a single motive. The separate motives,
or, rather, moods of mind, which produced the preceding reflec-
tions and anecdotes have been laid open to the reader in each sepa-
rate instance. But, an interest in the welfare of those who, at the
present time, may be in circumstances not dissimilar to my own at
my first entrance into life, has been the constant accompaniment,
and, (as it were,) the under-song of all my feelings. Whitehead,
exerting the prerogative of his laureatship, addressed to youthful
poets a poetic charge, which is perhaps the best, and certainly the
most interesting of his works. With no other privilege than that
of sympathy and sincere good wishes, 1 would address an affec-
tionate exhortation to the youthful literati, grounded on my own
experience. It will be but short; for the beginning, middle, and
end, converge to one charge: never pursue literature as a
trade. With the exception of one extraordinary man, I have nev-
er known an individual, least of all an individual of genius, healthy
or happy without a profession, i. e. some regular employment which
does not depend on the will of the moment, and which can be car-
ried on so far mechanically, that an average quantum only of health,
spirits, and intellectual exertion, are requisite to its faithful dis-
charge. Three hours of leisure, unannoyed by any alien anxiety,
and looked forward to with delight as a change and recreation, will
suffice to realize in literature a larger product of what is truly ge-
nial, than weeks of compulsion. Money and immediate reputa-
tion, form only an arbitrary and accidental end of literary labour.
The hope of increasing them by any given exertion, will often prove
a stimulant to industry; but the necessity of acquiring them will, in
all works of genius, convert the stimulant into a narcotic. Motives
by excess reverse their very nature, and, instead of exciting, stun
and stupify the mind. For it is one contradistinction of genius

<page 135>
134 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
from lalent, that its predominant end is always comprised in the
means; and this is one of the many points which establish an anal-
ogy between genius and virtue. Now, though talents may exist
without genius, yet as genius cannot exist, certainly not manifest
itself, without talents, I would advise every scholar who feels the
genial power working within him, so far to make a division between
the two, as that he should devote his talents to the acquirement of
competence in some known trade or profession, and his genius to
objects of his tranquil and unbiassed choice; while the conscious-
ness of being actuated in both alike by the sincere desire to per-
form his duty, will alike ennoble both. My dear young friend, (I
would say,) "suppose yourself established in any honourable occu-
pation. From the manufactory, or counting house, from the law
court, or from having visited your last patient, you return at evening,
"Dear tranquil time, when the sweet sense of home
Is sweetest"
to your family, prepared for its social enjoyments, with the very
countenances of your wife and children brightened, and their voice
of welcome made doubly welcome by the knowledge that, as far
as they are concerned, you have satisfied the demands of the day
by the labour of the day. Then, when you retire into your study,
in the books onyour shelves,you re-visit so many venerable friends
with whom you can converse. Your own spirit, scarcely less free
from personal anxieties than the great minds that, in those books,
are still living for you! Even your writing desk, with its blank pa-
per, and all its other implements, will appear as a chain of flowers,
capable of linking your feelings, as well as thoughts, to events and
characters past or to come; not a chain of iron, which binds you
down to think of the future, and the remote, by recalling the claims
and feelings of the peremptory present. But why-should I say re-
tire? The habits of active life and daily intercourse with the stir
of the world, will tend to give you such self-command, that the pre-
sence of your family will be no interruption. Nay, the social si-
lence or undisturbing voices of a wife or sister, will be like a resto-
rative atmosphere, or soft music, which moulds a dream without
becoming its object. If facts are required, to prove the possibility
of combining weighty performances in literature with full and inde-
pendent employment, the works of Cicero and Xenophon among

<page 136>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 135
the ancients, of Sir Thomas Moore, Bacon, Baxter, or, to refer, at
once, to later and contemporary instances, Darwin and Roscoe,
are at once decisive of the question.
But all men may not dare promise themselves a sufficiency of
self-controul for the imitation of those examples; though strict
scrutiny should always be made, whether indolence, restlessness,
or a vanity impatient for immediate gratification, have not tamper-
ed with the judgment, and assumed the vizard of humility, for the
purposes of self-delusion. Still the church presents to every man
of learning and genius a profession, in which he may cherish a ra-
tional hope of being able to unite the widest schemes of literary
utility with the strictest performance of professional duties. Among
the numerous blessings of Christianity, the introduction of an estab-
lished church makes an especial claim on the gratitude of scholars
and philosophers; in England, at least, where the principles of pro-
testantism have conspired with the freedom of the government, to
double all its salutary powers by the removal of its abuses.
That not only the maxims, but the grounds of a pure »»»»—*■■';-..
the mere fragments of which,
"the lofty grave tragedians taught
In chorus or iambic, teachers best
Of moral prudence, with delight received
In brief sententious precepts;"
Paradise Regained.
and that the sublime truths of the divine unity and attributes, which
a Plato found most hard to learn, and deemed it still more difficult
to reveal; that these should have become the almost hereditary
property of childhood and poverty, of the hovel and the workshop;
that, even to the unlettered, they sound as common place, is a phe-
nomenon, which must withhold all but minds of the most vulgar
cast from undervaluing the services even of the pulpit and the read-
ing desk. Yet those who confine the efficiency of an established
church to its public offices, can hardly be placed in a much higher
rank of intellect. That to every parish throughout the kingdom
there is transplanted a germ of civilization; that in the remotest
villages there is a nucleus, round which the capabilities of the place
may crystallize and brighten; a model, sufficiently superior to ex-
cite, yet, sufficiently near to encourage and facilitate imitation -,

<page 137>
i36 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
this, the inobtrusive, continuous agency of a protestant church
establishment, this it is, which the patriot and the philanthropist,
who would fain unite the love of peace with the faith in the pro-
gressive amelioration of mankind, cannot estimate at too high
a price. "It cannot be valued with the gold of Ophir, with the
precious onyx, or the sapphire. No mention shall be made of
coral or of pearls, for the price of wisdom is above rubies." The
clergyman is with his parishioners, and among them; he is nei-
ther in the cloistered cell, or in the wilderness, but a neighbor
and a family-man, whose education and rank admit him to the
mansion of the rich land-holder, while his duties make him the
frequent visiter of the farm-house and the cottage. He is, or he
may become, connected with the families of his parish, or its vicin-
ity, by marriage. And among the instances of the blindness, or at
best, of the short-sightedness, which it is the nature of cupidity to
inflict, I know few more striking than the clamours of the farmers
against church property. Whatever was not paid to the clergymen,
would inevitably at the next lease be paid to the land-holder; while,
as the case at present stands, the revenues of the church are, in
some sort, the reversionary property of every family, that may have
a member educated for the church, or a daughter that may marry a
clergyman. Instead of being foreclosed and immoveable, it is in fact the only species of landed property that is essentially moving
and circulative. That there exist no inconveniences, who will
pretend to assert? But I have yet to expect the proof, that the in-
conveniences are greater in this than in any other species; or, that
either the farmers or the clergy would be benefitted by forcing the
latter to become either Trtdlibers or salaried placemen. Nay, I
do not hesitate to declare my firm persuasion, that whatever reason
of discontent the farmers may assign, the true cause is this; that
they may cheat the parson, but cannot cheat the steward; and they
are disappointed, if they should have been able to withhold only
two pounds less than the legal claim,-having expected to withhold
five. At all events, considered relatively to the encouragement of
learning and genius, the establishment presents a patronage, at once
so effective and unburthensome, that it would be impossible to af-
ford the like, or equal, in any but a christian and protestant country.
There is scarce a department of human knowledge, without some
bearing on the various critical, historical, philosophical, and moral

<page 138>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 137
truths, in which, the scholar must be interested as a clergyman; no
one pursuit worthy of a man of genius, which may not be followed
without incongruity. To give the history of the bible as a book,
would be little less than to relate the origin, or first excitement, of
all the literature and science that we now possess. The very de-
corum which the profession imposes, is favorable to the best pur-
poses of genius, and tends to counteract its most frequent defects.
Finally, that man must be deficient in sensibility, who would not
find an incentive to emulation in the great and burning lights, which,
in a long series have illustrated the church of England; who would
not hear from within an echo to the voice from their sacred shrines,
"Et Pater ^neas et avunculus excitat Hector."
But, whatever be the profession or trade chosen, the advantages
are many and important, compared with the state of a mere literary
man, who, in any degree, depends on the sale of his works for the
necessaries and comforts of life. In the former, a man lives in
sympathy with the world in which he lives. At least, he acquires a
better and quicker tact for the knowledge of that with which men in
general can sympathize. He learns to manage his genius more
prudently and efficaciously. His powers and acquirements gain
him likewise more real admiration, for they surpass the legitimate
expectations of others. He is something besides an author, and is
not therefore considered merely as an author. The hearts of men
are open to him, as to one of their own class; and whether he ex-
erts himself or not in the conversational circles of his acquaint-
ance, his silence is not attributed to pride, nor his communicative-
ness to vanity. To these advantages I will venture to add a supe-
rior chance of happiness in domestic life, were it only that it is as
natural for the man to be out of the circle of his household during
the day, as it is meritorius for the woman to remain for the most
part within it. But this subject involves points of consideration so
numerous and so delicate, and would not only permit, but require
such ample documents from the biography of literary men, that I
now merely allude to it in transitu. When the same circumstance
has occurred at very different times to very different persons, all of
whom have some one thing in common, there is reason to suppose
that such circumstance is not merely attributable to the persons con-
cerned, but is, in some measure, occasioned by the one point in
17

<page 139>
138 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
common to them all. Instead of the vehement and almost slan-
derous dehortation from marriage, which the Misogyne, Boccaccio
(Vita e Costumi di Dante, p. 12. 16.) addresses to literary men, I
would substitute the simple advice; be not merely a man of letters!
Let literature be an honourable augmentation to your arms, but not
constitute the coat, or fill the escutcheon!
To objections from conscience I can of course answer in no oth-
er way, than by requesting the youthful objector (as I have already
done on a former occasion) to ascertain with strict self-examina-
tion, whether other influences may not be at work; whether spirits,
"not of health," and with whispers "not from heaven," may not be
walking in the twilight of his consciousness. Let him catalogue
his scruples, and reduce them to a distinct intelligible form; let him
be certain that he has read with a docile mind and favourable dispo-
sitions, the best and most fundamental works on the subject; that
he has had both mind and heart opened to the great and illustrious
qualities of the many renowned characters, who had doubted like
himself, and whose researches had ended in the clear conviction,
that their doubts had been groundless, or at least in no proportion
to the counter-weight. Happy will it be for such a man, if, among
his contemporaries elder than himself, he should meet with one, who
with similar powers, and feelings as acute as his own, had enter-
tained the same scruples; had acted upon them; and who, by af-
ter-research (when the step was, alas! irretrievable, but for that
very reason his research undeniably disinterested) had discovered
himself to have quarrelled with received opinions only to embrace
errors, to have left the directions tracked out for him on the high
road of honourable exertion, only to deviate into a labyrinth, where,
when he had wandered, till his head was giddy, his best good for-
tune was finally to have found his way out again, too late for prudence, though not too late for conscience or for truth! Time spent
in such delay is time won; for manhood in the mean time is advan-
cing, and with it increase of knowledge, strength of judgment, and,
above all, temperance of feelings. And even if these should effect
no change, yet the delay will at least prevent the final approval of
the decision from being alloyed by the inward censure of the rash-
ness and vanity by which it had been precipitated. It would be a
sort of irreligion, and scarcely less than a libel on human nature, to
believe that there is any established and reputable profession or em-

<page 140>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 139
ployment, in which a man may not continue to act with honesty and
honour; and, doubtless, there is likewise none which may not at
times, present temptations to the contrary. But wofully will that
man find himself mistaken, who imagines that the profession of lit-
erature, or (to speak more plainly) the trade of authorship, besets
its members with fewer or with less insidious temptations, than the
church, the law, or the different branches of commerce. But I
have treated sufficiently on this unpleasant subject in an early chap-
ter of this volume. I will conclude the present, therefore, with a
short extract from Herder, whose name I might have added to the
illustrious list of those who have combined the successful pursuit
of the muses, not only with the faithful discharge, but with the
highest honours and honourable emoluments of an established pro-
fession. The translation the reader will find in a note below.*
"Am sorgf altigsten, meiden sie die Autorschaft. Zu fruh oder
unmassig gebraucht, macht sie den Kopf wuste und das Herz leer;
wenn sie auch sonst keine uble Folgen gabe. Ein Mensch, der
nur lieset um zu druceken, lieset wahrscheinlich ubel; und wer
jeden Gedanken, der ihm aufstosst, durch Feder und Presse ver-
sendet, hat sie in kurzer Zeit alle versandt, und wird bald ein blosser
Diener der Druckerey, ein Buchstabensetzer werden.
Herder.
* Translation.—"With the greatest possible solicitude avoid authorship.
Too early, or immoderately employed, it makes the head waste and the heart emp-
ty; even were there no other worse consequences. A person who reads only to
print, in all probability reads amiss; and he who sends away through the pen and
the press, every thought, the moment it occurs to him, will in a short time have
sent all away, and will become a mere journeyman of the printing-office, a com-
positor." -
To which I may add from myself, that what medical physiologists affirm of
certain secretions, applies equally to our thoughts; they too must be taken up
again into the circulation, and be again and again re secreted, in order to ensure
a healthful vigour, both to the mind and to its intellectual offspring.

<page 141>
CHAPTER XII.
A Chapter of requests and premonitions concerning the perusal or ommission of
the chapter that follows.
In the perusal of philosophical works, I have been greatly bene-
fitted by a resolve, which, in the antithetic form, and with the allow-
ed quaintness of an adage or maxim, I have been accustomed to
word thus: "until you understand a writer's ignorance, presume
yourself ignorant oj his understanding." This golden rule of mine
does, I own, resemble those of Pythagoras, in its obscurity rather
than in its depth. If, however, the reader will permit me to be my
own Hierocles, I trust that he will find its meaning fully explained
by the following instances. I have now before me a treatise of a
religious fanatic, full of dreams and supernatural experiences. I
see clearly the writer's grounds, and their hollowness. I have a
complete insight into the causes, which, through the medium of his
body, had acted on his mind; and by application of received and
ascertained laws, I can satisfactorily explain to my own reason, all
the strange incidents which the writer records of himself. And
this I can do without suspecting him of any intentional falsehood.
As when in broad day-light a man tracks the steps of a traveller,
who had lost his way in a fog, or by treacherous moonshine; even
so, and with the same tranquil sense of certainty, can I follow the
traces of this bewildered visionary. I understand his igno-
rance.
On the other hand, I have been re-perusing, with the best ener-
gies of my mind, the Timaeus of Plato. Whatever I compre-
hend, impresses me with a reverential sense of the author's genius;
but there is a considerable portion of the work to which I can attach
no consistent meaning. In other treatises of the same philoso-
pher, intended for the average comprehensions of men, I have been
delighted with the masterly good sense, with the perspicuity of the
language, and the aptness of the inductions. I recollect, likewise,
that numerous passages in this author, which I thoroughly compre-
hend, were formerly no less unintelligible to me, than the passages
now in question. It would, I am aware, be quite fashionable to

<page 142>
BIOGBAPHIA L1TERAEIA. 141
dismiss them at once as Platonic jargon. But this I cannot do,
with satisfaction to my own mind, because I have sought in vain for
causes adequate to the solution of the assumed inconsistency. I
have no insight into the possibility of a man so eminently wise,
using words with such half-meanings to himself, as must perforce
pass into no-meaning to his readers. When, in addition to the mo-
tives thus suggested by my own reason, I bring into distinct re-
membrance the number and the series of great men, who, after
long and zealous study of these works, had joined in honouring
the name of Plato with epithets, that almost transcend humanity,
I feel that a contemptuous verdict on my part might argue want of
modesty, but would hardly be received by the judicious, as evidence
of superior penetration. Therefore, utterly baffled in all my at-
tempts to understand the ignorance of Plato, I condlude myself
IGNORANT OF HIS UNDERSTANDING.
In lieu of the various requests, which the anxiety of authorship
addresses to the unknown reader, I advance but this one; that he
will either pass over the following chapter altogether, or read the
whole connectedly. The fairest part of the most beautiful body
will appear deformed and monstrous, if dissevered from its place
in the organic whole. Nay, on delicate subjects, where a seem-
ingly trifling difference of more or less may constitute a difference
in kind, even a faithful display of the main and supporting ideas,
if yet they are separated from the forms by which they are at once
clothed and modified, may perchance present a skeleton indeed;
but a skeleton to alarm and deter. Though I might find numerous
precedents, I shall not desire the reader to strip his mind of all prejudices, or to keep all prior systems out of view during his exami-
nation of the present. For, in truth, such requests appear to me
not much unlike the advice given to hypocondriacal patients in
Dr. Buchan's domestic medicine; videlicit, to preserve themselves
uniformly tranquil and in good spirits. Till I had discovered the
art of destroying the memory a parte post, without injury to its fu-
ture operations, and without detriment to the judgment, I should
suppress the request as premature; and, therefore, however much
I may wish to be read with an unprejudiced mind, I do not presume
to state it as a necessary condition.
The extent of my daring is to suggest one criterion, by which it
may be rationally conjectured before-hand, whether or no a reader

<page 143>
142 BI0GKAPH1A LITERARIA.
would lose his time, and perhaps his temper, in the perusal of this,
or any other treatise constructed on similar principles. But it
would be cruelly misinterpreted, as implying the least disrespect
either for the moral or intellectual qualities of the individuals there-
by precluded. The criterion is this: if a man receives as funda-
mental facts, and therefore of course indemonstrable, and incapa-
ble of further analysis, the general notions of matter, soul, body,
action, passiveness, time, space, cause and effect, consciousness,
perception, memory and habit; if he feels his mind completely at
rest concerning all these, and is satisfied if only he can analyse all
other notions into some one or more of these supposed elements,
with plausible subordination and apt arrangement: to such a mind
I would as courteously as possible convey the hint, that for him the
chapter was not written.
Vir bonus es, doctus, prudens; ast hand tibi tpiro.
For these terms do, in truth, include all the difficulties which the
human mind can propose for solution. Taking them, therefore, in
mass, and unexamined, it requires only a decent apprenticeship in
logic, to draw forth their contents in all forms and colours, as the
professors of legerdemain at our village fairs pull out ribbon after
ribbon from their mouths. And not more difficult is it to reduce
them back again to their different genera. But though this analy-
sis is highly useful in rendering our knowledge more distinct, it
does not really add to it. It does not increase, though it gives us
a greater mastery over, the wealth which we before possessed. For
forensic purposes, for all the established professions of society, this
is sufficient. But for philosophy in its highest sense, as the sci-
ence of ultimate truths, and therefor scientia scientiarum, this mere
analysis of terms is preparative only, though, as a preparative dis-
cipline, indispensable.
Still less dare a favourable perusal be anticipated from the pros-
elytes of that compendious philosophy, which talking of mind but
thinking of brick and mortar, or other images equally abstracted
from body, contrives a theory of spirit by nicknaming matter, and
in a few hours can qualify its dullest disciples to explain the omne
scibile by reducing all things to impressions, ideas, and sensations.
But it is time to tell the truth; though it requires some courage
to avow it in an age and country, in which disquisitions on all sub-

<page 144>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 143
jectSi not privileged to adopt technical terms or scientific symbols,
must be addressed to the public. I say then, that it is neither pos-
sible or necessary for all men, or for many, to be philosophers.
There is a philosophic (and inasmuch as it is actualized by an effort
of freedom, an artificial) consciousness, which lies beneath, or, (as
it were,) behind the spontaneous consciousness natural to all re-
flecting beings. As the elder Romans distinguished their northern
provinces into Cis-Alpine and Trans-Alpine, so may we divide all
the objects of human knowledge into those on this side, and those
on the other side of the spontaneous consciousness; citra et trans
conscientiam communem. The latter is exclusively the domain of
pure philosophy, which is, therefore, properly entitled transcenden-
tal, in order to discriminate it at once, both from mere reflection
and re-presentation on the one hand, and on the other from those
flights of lawless speculation, which, abandoned by all distinct con-
sciousness, because transgressing the bounds and purposes of our
intellectual faculties, are justly condemned, as transcendent.* The
first range of hills that encircles the scanty vale of human life, is
the horizon for the majority of its inhabitants. On its ridges the
common sun is born and departs. From them the stars rise, and
"This distinction between transcendental and transcendent, is observed by our
elder divines and philosophers, whenever they express themselves scholaslically.
Dr. Johnson, indeed, has confounded the two words; but his own authorities do
not bear him out. Of this celebrated dictionary, I will venture to remark, once
for all, that I should suspect the man of a morose disposition, who should speak
of it without respect and gratitude, as a most instructive and entertaining book,
and hitherto, unfortunately, an indispensable book; but I confess, that I should
be surprised at hearing from a philosophic and thorough scholar, any but very
qualified praises of it, as a dictionary. I am not now alluding to the number of
genuine words omitted; for this is (and, perhaps, to a great extent) true, as Mr.
Wakefield has noticed, of our best Greek Lexicons; and this, too, after the suc-
cessive labours of so many giants in learning. I refer, at present, both to omis-
sions and commissions of a more important nature. What these are, me saltern
judice, will be stated at full in The Friend, re-published and completed.
I had never heard of the correspondence between Wakefield and Fox, till t-saw
the account of it this morning, (16th September, 1815,) in the Monthly Review.
I was not a little gratified at finding, that Mr. Wakefield had proposed to himself
nearly the same plan for a Greek and English Dictionary, which I had formed,
and began to execute, now ten years ago. But far, far more grieved am I, that
he did not live to complete it. I cannot but think it a subject of most serious re-
gret, that the same heavy expenditure which is now employing in the republi-
cation of Stepha.nus augmented, had not been applied to a new Lexicon, on a
more philosophical plan, with the English, German, and French Synonimes, as
well as the Latin. In almost every instance, the precise individual meaning
might be given in an English or German word; whereas, in Latin, we must too
often be contented with a mere general and inclusive term. How, indeed, can it
be otherwise, when we attempt to render the most copious language of the world,
the most admirable for the fineness of its distinctions, into one of the poorest and
most vague languages? Especially, when we reflect on the comparative number
of the works, still extant, written while the Greek and Latin were living langua-
ges. Were I asked, what I deemed the greatest and most unmixt benefit which
a wealthy individual, or an association of wealthy individuals, could bestow on

<page 145>
144 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
touching them they vanish. By the many, even this range, the
natural limit and bulwark of the vale, is but imperfectly known.
Its hjghfirjiscents are too often hidden by mists and clouds from
uncultivated swamps, which few have courage or curiosity to pen-
etrate. To the multitude below these vapours appear, now, as the
dark haunts of terrific agents, on which none may intrude with im-
punity; and now all a-glow, with colours not their own, they are
gazed at as the splendid palaces of happiness and power. But in
all ages there have been a few who, measuring and sounding the
rivers of the vale at the feet of their furthest inaccessible falls, have
learnt that the sources must be far higher and far inward; a few,
who even in the level streams have detected elements, which nei-
ther the vale itself or the surrounding mountains contained or could
supply. How and whence to these thoughts, these strong proba-
bilities, the ascertaining vision, the intuitive knowledge, may finally
supervene, can be learnt only by the fact. I might oppose to the
question the words with which Plolinus* supposes nature to an-
swer a similar difficulty. "Should any one interrogate her how she
works, if graciously she vouchsafe to listen and speak, she will re-
ply, it behooves thee not to disquiet me with interrogatories, but to
understand in silence, even as I am silent, and work without words."
Likewise, in the fifth book of the fifth Ennead, speaking of the
highest and intuitive knowledge as distinguished from the discur-
sive, or, in the language of Wordsworth,
"The vision and the faculty divine;"
he says: "it is not lawful to inquire from whence it sprang, as if it
were a thing subject to place and motion, for it neither approached
their country and on mankind, I should not hesitate to answer, "a philosophical
English dictionary, with the Greek, Lntin, German, French, Spanish and Italian
synonimes, and with corresponding indexes." That the learned languages might
thereby be acquired better, in half the time, is but a part, and not the most impor-
tant part, of the advantages which would accrue from such a work. O! if it
should be permitted, by Providence, that, without detriment to freedom and in-
dependenceJ"our government might be enabled to become more than a commit-
tee for war and revenue! There was a time when every thing was to be done by
government. Have we not flown off to the contrary extreme?
* Ennead iii. 1. 8. c. 3. The force of the Greek juvi£vai is imperfectly express-
ed by "understand;" our own idiomatic phrase "to go along with me," comes
nearest to it. The passage that follows, full of profound sense, appears to me
evidently corrupt; and, in fact, no writer more wants, better deserves, or is less
likely to obtain, a new and more correct edition:—ti Sv guii&ai; oti to ysvo.
jasvov £ji S£afia £ftov, jiwtf»]jij (mallem, Ss'afxa, ifiS giwir'wjjjs,) xai tpvssi
ysvou,svov Sswp*ifJia xai fioi ysvopivri kx Sswpi'ag res w5J, <rsv <pugiv 'iyiw

<page 146>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 145
hither, nor again departs from hence to some other place; but it
either appears to us, or it does not appear. So that we ought not
to pursue it with a view of detecting its secret source, but to watch
in quiet till it suddenly shines upon us; preparing ourselves for the
blessed spectacle, as the eye waits patiently for the rising sun."
They, and they only, can acquire the philosophic imagination, the
sacred power of self-intuition, who, within themselves, can inter-
pret and understand the symbol, that the wings of the air-sylph are
forming within the skin of the caterpillar; those only, who feel in
their own spirits the same instinct which impels the crysalis of the
horned fly to leave room in its involucrum for antennae yet to come.
They know and feel, that the potential works in them, even as the
actual works on them! In short, all the organs of sense are fram-
ed for a corresponding world of sense; and we have it. All the
organs of spirit are framed for a correspondent world of spirit:
though the latter organs are not developed in all alike. But they exist in all, and their first appearance discloses itself in the moral
being. How else could it be, that even worldlings, not wholly de-
based, will contemplate the man of simple and disinterested good-
ness with contradictory feelings of pity and respect?"Poor man!
he is not made for this world." Oh! herein they utter a prophecy
of universal fulfilment; for man must either rise or sink.
It is the essential mark of the true philosopher to rest satisfied
with njijmjDejrf&C-l light, as long as the impossibility of attaining a
fuller knowledge has not been demonstrated. That the common
consciousness itself will furnish proofs by its own direction, that it
is connected with master-currents below the surface, I shall merely
assume as a postulate pro tempore. This having been granted,
though but in expectation of the argument, I can safely deduce from
it the equal truth of my former assertion, that philosophy cannot be
intelligible to all, even of the most learned and cultivated classes.
A system, the first principle of which it is to render the mind intui-
tive of the spiritual in man, (i. e. of that which lies on the other
side of our natural consciousness,) must needs have a great obscu-
<piXoSs<x(Aova utfapxsi (mallem, xai fioi ■rfi ysvofievrj ix SsfApiaj dvrrjs &<%.)
"What then are we to understand? That whatever is produced is an intuition,
I silent; and that, which is thus generated, is by its nature a theorem, or form of
contemplation; and the birth, which results to me from this contemplation, attains
to have a contemplative nature." So Synesius; fi<5ij 'pa, App^jra Tov5. The
after comparison of the process of thenatura naturans with that of the geometri-
cian is drawn from the very heart of philosophy.
18

<page 147>
146 BIOGRAPHIA L1TERAR1A.
rity for those who have never disciplined and strengthened this ul-
terior consciousness. It must, in truth, be a land of darkness, a
perfect Jlnte-Goahen, for men to whom the noblest treasures of
their being are reported only through the imperfect translation of
lifeless and sightless notions: perhaps, in great part, through words
which are but the shadows of notions; even as the notional under-
standing itself is but the shadowy abstraction of living and actual
truth. On the immediate, which dwells in every man, and on the
original intuition, or absolute affirmation of it, (which is likewise in
every man, but does not in every man rise into consciousness,) all
the certainty of our knowledge depends; and this becomes intelli-
gible to no man by the ministery of mere words from without. The
medium by which spirits understand each other, is not the surround-
ing air; but the freedom which they possess in common, as the
common ethereal element of their being, the tremulous reciproca-
tions of which propagate themselves even to the inmost of the soul.
Where the spirit of a man is not filled with the consciousness of
freedom, (were it only from its restlessness, as of one still strug-
gling in bondage,) all spiritual intercourse is interrupted, not only
with others, but even with himself. No wonder, then, that he re-
mains incomprehensible to himself as well as to others. No won-
der, that in the fearful desert of his conciousness, he wearies him-
self out with empty words, to which no friendly echo answers, either
from his own heart or the heart of a fellow being; or bewilders
himself in the pursuit of notional phantoms, the mere refractions
from unseen and distant truths, through the distorting medium of
his own unenlivened and stagnant understanding! To remain un-
intelligible to such a mind, exclaims Schelling, on a like occasion,
is honour and a good name before God and man.
The history of philosophy, (the same writer observes,) contains
instances of systems which for successive generations, have re-
mained enigmatic. Such he deems the system of Leibnitz, whom
another writer, (rashly I think, and invidiously,) extols as the only
philosopher who was himself deeply convinced of his own doc-
trines. As hitherto interpreted, however, they have not produced
the effect which Leibnitz himself, in a most instructive passage,
describes as the criterion of a true philosophy; namely, that it
would at once explain and collect the fragments of truth scattered
through systems apparently the most incongruous. The truth,


<page 148>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 147
says he, is diffused more widely than is commonly believed; but it
is often painted, yet oftener masked, and is sometimes mutilated,
and sometimes, alas! in close alliance with mischievous errors.
The deeper, however, we penetrate into the ground of things, the
more truth we discover in the doctrines of the greater number of
the philosophical sects. The want of substantial reality in the ob-
jects of the senses, according to the sceptics; the harmonies or
numbers, the prototypes and ideas, to which the Pythagoreans and
Flatonists reduced all things; the one and all of Parmenides and
Plotinus, without Spinozism ;* the necessary connection of things
according to the Stoics, reconcilable with the spontaneity of the
other schools; the vital philosophy of the Cabalists and Hermetists,
_ * This is happily effected in three lines by Synesids, in his Fourth Hymn:
'Ev xoi Tl&vra—(taken by itself) si Spinozism.
'Ev 5' 'Airavruv—a mere anima Mundi.
'Ev t6 *6 tfjovTwv—is mechanical Theism.
But unite all three, and the result is the Theism of St. Paul and Christianity.
Synesius was censured for his doctrine of the pre-existence of the Soul; but
never, that I can find, arraigned or deemed heretical for his Pantheism, though
neither Giordano Bruno, or Jacob Behmen, ever avowed it more broadly.
Migas 5e Nooj,
Tot rs xai ra. Xs'ysi,
BO&ov a^jujTov
AfMpi^opsuwv.
20 TO TIXTOV 5<pUS,
20 TO TIXTOfASVOV .
20 TO (pWTI^lOV,
20 to XajjwrofiSvov
20 to ipaivo'fASvov,
20 TO XJUtfTOfASVOV
iSious duyaij.
'Ev xai itaxra,
Ev xa&( iauTO,
Kai Sia. tfavrov.
Pantheism is, therefore, not necessarily irreligious or heretical; though it may
be taught atheistically. Thus, Spinoza would agree with Synesius in calling God
*usi£ Sv NoSyoij, the Nature in Intelligences; but be could not subscribe to the
preceding NouS xdti Nospoj, j. e. Himself Intelligence and intelligent.
In this biographical sketch of my literary life, I may be excused, if I mention
here, that I had translated the eight Hymns of Synesius from the Greek into
English Anacreontics before my loth year.

<page 149>
148 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA*
who assumed the universality of sensation; the substantial forms
and entelechies of Aristotle and the schoolmen, together with the
mechanical solution of all particular phenomena according to De-
mocritus and the recent philosophers; all these we shall find united
in one perspective central point, which shows regularity and a coin-
cidence of all the parts in the very object which, from every other
point of view, must appear confused and distorted. The spirit of
sectarianism has been hitherto our fault, and the cause of our fail-
ures. We have imprisoned our own conceptions by the lines which
we have drawn in order to exclude the conceptions of others. J'ai
trouve que la plupart des sectes ont raison dans une bonne partie
de ce qu'elles avancent, mais non pas en ce qu'elles nient.
A system which aims to deduce the memory with all the other
functions of intelligence, must, of course, place its first position
from beyond the memory, and anterior to it, otherwise the principle
of solution would be itself a part of the problem to be solved. Such
a position, therefore, must, in the first instance, be demanded, and
the first question will be, by what right is it demanded 1 On this account I think it expedient to make some preliminary remarks on
the introduction of Postulates in philosophy. The word postu-
late, is borrowed from the science of mathematics. (See Schell.
abhandl zur Erlauter, des id der Wissensehaftslehre.) In geome-
try the primary construction is not demonstrated, but postulated.
This first and most simple construction in space, is the point in mo-
tion, or the line. Whether the point is moved in one and ths same
direction, or whether its direction is continually changed, remains
as-yet undetermined. But if the direction of the point have been
determined, it is either by a point without it, and then there arises
the straight line which incloses no space; or the direction of the
point is not determined by a point without it, and then it must flow
back again on itself; that is, there arises a cyclicalJine, which does inclose a space. If the straight line be assumed as the positive,
the cyclical is then the negation of the straight. It is a line
which at no point strikes out into the straight, but changes its di-
rection continuously. But if the primary line be conceived as un-
determined, and the straight line as determined throughout, then
the cyclical is the third, compounded of both. It is at once unde-
termined and determined; undetermined through any point without,
and determined through itself. Geometry, therefore, supplies phi-

<page 150>
BIOCRAI-HIA LITERARIA. 149
losophy with the example of a primary intuition, from which every
science jhat,l_ajs_ claim to evidence must take its commencement.
The mathematician does not begin with a demonstrable proposition,
but with an intuition, a practical idea.
But here an important distinction presents itself. Philosophy is
employed on objects of the inner sense, and cannot, like geome-
try, appropriate to every construction a correspondent outward in-
tuition. Nevertheless, philosophy, if it is to arrive at evidence,
must proceed frTmTThefmost ongTnarcl>nstructiun,-an<Hhe question
then is,-what is"{h&Tnost- original construction or first productive
act for the inner sense? The answer to this question depends
on the direction which is given to the inner sense. But in phi-
losophy the inner sense cannot have its direction determined by
any outward object. To the original construction of the line, I
can be compelled by a line drawn before me on the slate or on
sand. The stroke thus drawn is indeed not the line itself, but only
the image or picture of the line. It is not from it that we first learn
to know the line; but, on the contrary, we bring this stroke to the
original line, generated by the act of the imagination; otherwise we
could not define it as without breadth or thickness. Still, however,
this stroke is the sensuous image of the original or ideal line, and
an efficient mean to excite every imagination to the intuition of it.
It is demanded then, whether there be found any means in phi-
losophy to determine the direction of the inner sense, as in math-
ematics it is determinable by its specific image or outward picture.
Now, the inner sense has its direction determined for the greater
part only by an act of freedom. One man's consciousness extends
only to the pleasant or unpleasant sensations caused in him by ex-
ternal impressions; another enlarges his inner sense to a con-
sciousness of forms and quantity; a third, in addition to the image,
is conscious of the conception or notion of the thing; a fourth at-
tains to a notion of notions—he reflects on his own reflections;
and thus we may say, without impropriety, that the one possesses
more or less inner sense than the other. This more or less betrays
already that philosophy, in its principles, must have a practical or
moral, as well as a theoretical or speculative side. This difference in
degree does not exist in the mathematics. Socrates in Plato shows,
that an ignorant slave may be brought to understand, and, of him-
self, to solve the most geometrical problem. Socrates drew the

<page 151>
150 BIOGRAPHIA. LITERAHIA.
figures for the slave in the sand. The disciples of the critical phi-
losophy could likewise (as was indeed actually done by La Forge
and some other followers of Des Cartes) represent the origin of
our representations in copper-plates; but no one has yet attempted
it, and it would be utterly useless. To an Esquimaux or New
Zealander,our most popular philosophy would be wholly unintelli-
gible; for the sense, the inward organ, is not yet born in him. So
is there many a one among us, yes, and some who think themselves
philosophers too, to whom the philosophic organ is entirely want-
ing. To such a man, philosophy is a mere play of words and no-
tions, like a theory of music to the deaf, or like the geometry of
light to the blind. The connection of the parts and their logical
dependencies may be seen and remembered; but the whole is
groundless and hollow, unsustained by living contact, unaccompa-
nied with any realizing intuition which exists by, and in the act that
affirms its existence, which is known, because it is, and is, because
it is known. The words of Plotinus, in the assumed person of
nature, holds true of the philosophic energy. Io SswjSv (jls Ssuj»i|j,a
tfoisi, ugWEj 01 rsupslSai Ssuoxleg yjoupsjiv, aXX' Jfix jaij yooupkiys, Ss&j-
jijos Si, 0<pijav7ai aiTwv gupdluv ySa.iJ.jMu. With me the act of con-
templation makes the thing contemplated, as the geometricians con-
templating describe lines correspondent; but I not describing lines,
but simply contemplating, the representative form of things rise up
into existence. „
5£he po^^latejo^phUosophyj anpVat-tfae-«aoaaJimet the test of
philosophic_capacity, is no other than the heaven-descended know
jthtself!_.E cozlo descendit, Tvudi jsaulov.) and this at once practi-
_cajly and speculatively. For, as philosophy is neither a science of
the reason or understanding only, nor merely a science of morals,
but the science of being altogether, its primary ground can be neither merely speculative.^ jn_erely_practical, but both in one. All
knowledge rests on the coincidence of an object with a subject.
(My readers have been warned in a former chapter, that for their
convenience as well as the writer's, the term subject, is used by me
in its scholastic sense, as equivalent to mind or sentient being,
and as the necessary correlative of object or quicquid objicitur
menti.) For we can know that only which is true; and the truth
is universally placed in the coincidence of the thought with the
thing, of the representation with the object represented.

<page 152>
BI0GRAPH1A L1TERAR1A. 151
Now the sum of alHhaLi.s naerelj_OBJECTivE, we will henceforth
call nature, confining the term to its passive and material sense,
as comprising all the phenomena by which its existence is made
known to us. On the other hand, the sum of all that is subjective,
we may comprehend in the name of the self or intelligence.
Both conceptions are in necessary antithesis. Intelligence is con-
ceived of, as exclusively representative, nature as exclusively rep-
resented; the one as conscious, the other as without conscious-
ness. Now, in all acts of positive knowledge, there is required a
reciprocal concurrence of both, namely, of the conscious being,
and of that which is, in itself, unconscious. Our problem is to ex-
plain this concurrence, its possibility, and its necessity.
During the act of knowledge itself, the objective and subjective
are so instantly united, that we cannot determine to which of the
two the priority belongs. There is here no first, and no second;
both are coinstantaneous and one. While I am attempting to ex-
plain this intimate coalition, I must suppose it dissolved. I must
necessarily set out from the one, to which, therefore, I give hypo-
thetical antecedence, in order to arrive at the other. But, as there
are but two factors or elements in the problem, subject and object,
and as it is left indeterminate from which of them I should com-
mence, there are two cases equally possible,
I. Either the Objective is taken as the first, and
then we have to account for the supervention of the
Subjective, which coalesces with it.
The notion of the subjective is not contained in the notion of the
objective. On the contrary, they mutually exclude each other.
The subjective, therefore, must supervene to the objective. The
conception ofnature does^not apparently involve the co-presence of
■an intelligeneeanaking an ideal duplicate of it, i. e. representing it.
This desk, for instance, would (according to our natural notions)
be, though there should exist no sentient being to look at it. This
then is the problem of natural philosophy. It assumes the objec-
tive or unconscious nature as the first, and has, therefore, to explain
how intelligence can supervene to it, or how itself can grow into in-
telligence. If it should appear that all enlightened naturalists, with-
out having distinctly proposed the problem to themselves, have yet
constantly moved in the line of its solution, it must afford a strong
presumption that the problem itself is founded in nature. For if

<page 153>
152 BIOGRAPHIA L1TERARIA.
all knowledge has, as it were, two poles reciprocally required and
presupposed, all sciences must proceed from the one or the othen
and must tend toward the opposite as far as the equatorial point in
which both are reconciled, and become identical. The necessary
tendence, therefore, of all natural philosophy, is from nature to in-
telligence; and this, and no other, is the true ground and occasion
of the instinctive striving to introduce theory into our views of nat-
ural phenomena. The highest perfection of natural philosophy
would consist in the perfect spiritualization of all the laws of nature
into laws of intuition and intellect. The phenomena (the material)
must wholly disappear, and the laws alone (the formal) must re-
main. Thence it comes, that in nature itself, the more the princi-
ple of law breaks forth, the more does the husk drop off, the phe-
nomena themselves become more spiritual, and at length cease al-
together in our consciousness. The optical phenomena, are but
a geometry, the lines of which are drawn by light, and the materi-
ality of this light itself has already become matter of doubt. In the
appearances of magnetism, all trace of matter is lost, and, of the phe-
nomena of gravitation, which, not a few among the most illustrious
Newtonians, have declared no otherwise comprehensible than as an
immediate spiritual influence, there remains nothing but its law, the
execution of which on a vast scale, is the mechanism of the heavenly
motions. The theory of natural philosophy would then be comple-
ted; when all nature was demonstrated to be identical in essence with
that which, in its highest known power, exists in man as an intelli-
gence, and self-consciousness; when the heavens and the earth
shall declare, not only the power of their Maker, but the glory and
the presence of their God, even as he appeared to the great proph-
et during the vision of the mount in the skirts of his divinity.
This may suffice to show, that even natural science, which com-
mences with the material phenomenon as the reality and substance
of things existing, does yet, by the necessity of theorizing, uncon-
sciously, and, as it were, instinctively, end in nature as an intelli-
gence; and by this tendency, the science of nature becomes
finally natural philosophy, the one of the two poles of fundamental
science.
2. Or the subjective is taken as the first, and the
problem then is, how there supervenes to it a coincident
objective.

<page 154>
BIOGRAPHIA L1TERARIA. 153
In the pursuit of these sciences, our success in each depends on
an austere and faithful adherence to its own principles, with a care-
ful separation and exclusion of those which appertain to the oppo-
site science. As the natural philosopher, who directs his views to
the objective, avoids, above all things, the intermixture of the sub-
jective in his knowledge, as for instance, arbitrary suppositions or
rather suffictions, occult qualities, spiritual agents, and the substitu-
tion of final or efficient causes; so on the other hand, the transcen-
dental or intelligential philosopher, is equally anxious to preclude
all interpolation of the objective into the subjective principles of his
science; as, for instance, the assumption of impresses or configu-
rations in the brain, correspondent to miniature pictures on the re-
tina painted by rays of light from supposed originals, which are not
the immediate and real objects of vision, but deductions from it, for
the purposes of explanation. This purification of the mind is ef-
fected by an absolute and scientific scepticism to which the mind
voluntarily determines itself for the specific purpose of future cer-
tainty. Des Cartes, who (in his meditations) himself first, at least
of the moderns, gave a beautiful example of this voluntary doubt,
this self-determined indetermination, happily expresses its utter
difference from the scepticism of vanity or irreligion: Nee tamen
in eo scepticos imitabar, qui dubitant tantum ut dubitent, et preter
incertitudinem ipsam nihil quserunt. Nam contra totus in eo eram
ut aliquid certi reperirem.—Des Cartes, de. Methodo. Nor, is it
less distinct in its motives and final aim, than in its proper objects,
which are not, as in ordinary scepticism, the prejudices of education
and circumstance, but those original and innate prejudices, which
nature herself has planted in all men, and which, to all but the phi-
losopher, are the first principles of knowledge, and the final test of
truth.
Now these essential prejudices are all reducible to the one fun-
damental presumption, that there exist things without us.
As this on the one hand originates, neither in grounds or arguments,
and yet on the other hand remains proof against all attempts to re-
move it by grounds or arguments, (naturam furca expellas lamen
usque redibit;) on the one hand lays claim to immediate certainty
as a position at once indemonstrable and irresistible, and yet on
the other hand, inasmuch as it refers to something essentially dif-
ferent from ourselves, nay, even in opposition to ourselves, leaves
19

<page 155>
154 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
it inconceivable how it could possibly become a part of our imme-
diate consciousness; (in other words, how that, which ex hypothe-
si is and continues to be extrinsic and alien to our being, should
become a modification of our being,) the philosopher, therefore,
compels himself to treat this faith as nothing more than a prejudice,
innate, indeed, and connatural, but still a prejudice.
The other position, which not only claims, but necessitates the
admission of its immediate certainty, equally for the scientific rea-
son of the philosopher as for the common sense of mankind at
large, namely, I am, cannot so properly be entitled a prejudice. It
is groundless, indeed, but then in the very idea it precludes all
ground, and separated from the immediate consciousness, loses its
whole sense and import. It is groundless; but only because it is
itself the ground of all other certainty. Now the apparent contra-
diction, that the former position, namely, the existence of things
without us, which from its nature cannot be immediately certain,
should be received as blindly and as independently of all grounds
as the existence of our own being, the transcendental philosopher
can solve only by the supposition, that the former is unconsciously
involved in the latter; that it is not only coherent, but identical, and
one and the same thing with our own immediate self-conscious-
ness. To demonstrate this identity, is the office and object of his
philosophy.
If it be said, that this is Idealism, let it be remembered, that it is
only so far idealism as it is at the same time, and on that very ac-
count, the truest and most binding realism. For wherein does the
realism of mankind properly consist? In the assertion, that there
exists a something without them, what, or how, or where, they know
not, which occasions the objects of their perception? Oh no!
This is neither connatural or universal. It is what a few have
taught and learnt in the schools, and which the many repeat with-
out asking themselves concerning their own meaning. The real-
ism common to all mankind is far elder, and lies infinitely deeper
than this hypothetical explanation of the origin of our perceptions,
an explanation skimmed from the mere surface of mechanical phi-
losophy. It is the table itself, which the man of common sense
believes himself to see, not the phantom of a table, from which he
may argumentatively deduce the reality of a table, which he does
not see. If to destroy the reality of all that we actually behold, be

<page 156>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 155
idealism, what can be more egregiously go than the system of mod-
ern metaphysics, which banishes us to a land of shadows, surrounds
us with apparitions, and distinguishes truth from illusion only by
the majority of those who dream the same dream? "I asserted
that the world was mad," exclaimed poor Lee, "and the world said
that I was mad, and, confound them, they outvoted me."
It is to the true and original realism, that I would direct the at-
tention. This believes and requires neither more nor less, than
that the object which it beholds or presents to itself, is the real and
very object. In this sense, however much we may strive against
it, we are all collectively born idealists, and therefore, and only
therefore, are we at the same time realists. But of this the philos-
ophers of the schools know nothing, or despise the faith as the pre-
judice of the ignorant vulgar, because they live and move in a
crowd of phrases and notions from which human nature has long
ago vanished. Oh, ye that reverence yourselves, and walk humbly
with the divinity in your own hearts, ye are worthy of a better phi-
losophy! Let the dead bury the dead, but do you preserve your
human nature, the depth of which was never yet fathomed by a
philosophy made up of notions and mere logical entities.
In the third treatise of my Logosophia, announced at the end of
this volume, I shall give (deo volente) the demonstrations and con-
structions of the Dynamic Philosophy scientifically arranged. It
is, according to my conviction, no other than the system of Pythag-
oras and of Plato revived and purified from impure mixtures.
Doctrina per tot manus tradita tandem in Vappam desiit. The
science of arithmetic furnishes instances, that a rule may be useful
in practical application, and for the particular purpose may be suffi-
ciently authenticated by the result, before it has itself been fully
demonstrated. It is enough, if only it be rendered intelligible.
This will, I trust, have been effected in the following Theses, for
those of my readers who are willing to accompany me through the
following Chapter, in which the results will be applied to the de-
duction of the imagination, and with it the principles of production
and of genial criticism in the fine arts.
Thesis I.—Truth is correlative to being. Knowledge, without
a correspondent reality, is no knowledge ; if we know, there must be
somewhatknown by us. To know is in its very essence a verb active.

<page 157>
156 BIOGRAPHIA LITEIIARIA.
Thesis II.—All truth is either mediate, that is, derived from
some other truth or truths, or immediate and original. The latter
is absolute, and its formula A. A.; the former is of dependent or
conditional certainty, and represented in the formula B. A. The
certainty, which inheres in A, is attributable to B.
Scholium. A chain without a staple, from which all the links
derived their stability, or a series without a first, has been not in-
aptly allegorized, as a string of blind men, each holding the skirt of
the man before him, reaching far out of sight, but all moving with-
out the least deviation in one straight line. It would be naturally
taken for granted that there was a guide at the head of the file:
what if it were answered—No! sir, the men are without number,
and infinite blindness supplies the place of sight?
Equally inconceivable is a cycle of equal truths, without a com-
mon and central principle, which prescribes to each its proper
sphere in the system of science. That the absurdity does not so
immediately strike us, that it does not seem equally unimaginable,
is owing to a surreptitious act of the imagination, which, instinct-
ively, and without our noticing the same, not only fills at the inter-
vening spaces, and contemplates the cycle, (of B. C. D. E. F. &c.)
as a continuous circle, (A.) giving to all, collectively, the unity of
their common orbit; but likewise supplies, by a sort of subintelli-
gitur, the one central power, which renders the movement harmo-
nious and cyclical.
Thesis III.—We are to seek, therefore, for some absolute
truth, capable of communicating to other positions a certainty,
which it has not itself borrowed; a truth self-grounded, uncondi-
tional, and known by its own light. In short, we have to find a
somewhat, which is, simply, because it is. In order to be such, it
must be one which is its own predicate, so far, at least, that all
other nominal predicates must be modes and repetitions of itself.
Its existence, too, must be such as to preclude the possibility of re-
quiring a cause, or antecedent, without an absurdity.
Thesis IV.—That there can be but one such principle, may be
proved a priori; for were there two or more, each must refer to
some other, by which its equality is affirmed; consequently, neither
would be self-established, as the hypothesis demands. And a pos-

<page 158>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 157
teriori, it will be proved by the principle itself, when it is discover-
ed, as involving universal antecedents in its very conception.
Scholium. If we affirm of a board that it is blue, the predicate
(blue) is accidental, and not implied in the subject, board. If we
affirm of a circle, that it is equi-radical, the predicate, indeed, is
implied in the definition of the subject; but the existence of the
subject itself is contingent, and supposes both a cause and a per-
cipient. The same reasoning will apply to the indefinite number
of supposed indemonstrable truths, exempted from the prophane
approach of philosophic investigation by the amiable Beattie, and
other less eloquent and not more profound inaugurators of common
sense, on the throne of philosophy; a fruitless attempt, were it only
that it is the two-fold function of philosophy to reconcile reason
with common sense, and to elevate common sense into reason.
Thesis V.—Such a principle cannot be any thing or object.
Each thing is what it is in consequence of some other thing. An
infinite, independent thing,* is no less a contradiction, than an in-
finite circle, or a sideless triangle. Besides, a thing is that which
is capable of being an object, of which itself is not the sole percipi-
ent. But an object is inconceivable without a subject as its anti-
thesis. Omne perceptum percipientem supponit.
But neither can the principle be found in a subject, as a subject,
contra-distinguished from an object; for unicuique percipienti ali-
quid objicitur perceptum. It is to be found, therefore, neither in
object or subject, taken separately; and, consequently, as no other
third is conceivable, it must be found in that which is neither sub-
ject nor object exclusively, but which is the identity of both.
Thesis VI.—This principle, and so characterized, manifests it-
self in the Sum or I am; which I shall hereafter indiscriminately
express by the words spirit, self, and self-consciousness. In this,
and in this alone, object and subject, being and knowing, are iden-
tical, each involving and supposing the other. In other words, it is
a subject which becomes a subject by the act of constructing itself
objectively to itself; but which never is an object except for itself,
"The impossibility of an absolute thing, (substantia unica,) as neither genus,
species, nor individuum, as well as its utter unfitness for the fundamental posi-
tion of a philosophic system, will be demonstrated in the critique on Spinozism
in the fifth treatise of my Logosophia.

<page 159>
158 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
and only so far as by the very same act it becomes a subject. It
may be described, therefore, as a perpetual self-duplication of one
and the same power, into object and subject, which presuppose each
other, and can exist only as antithesis.
Scholium. If a man be asked how he knows that he is 1 he
can only answer, sum quia sum. But if (the absoluteness of this
certainty having been admitted) he be again asked, how he, the in-
dividual person, came to be, then, in relation to the ground of his
existence, not to the ground of his knowledge of that existence 1- he
might reply, sum quia deus est, or still more philosophically, sum
quia in deo sum.
But if we elevate our conception to the absolute self, to the great
eternal I am, then the principle of being, and of knowledge, of idea,
and of reality; the ground of existence, and the ground of the
knowledge of existence, are absolutely identical. Sum quia sum;
I am, because I affirm myself to be; I affirm myself to be, because
I am.* •
Thesis VII.—If then I know myself only through myself, it is
contradictory to require any other predicate of self, but that of self-
consciousness. Only in the self-consciousness of a spirit is there
the required identity of object and of representation; for herein
consists the essence of a spirit, that it is self-representative. If, there* It is most worthy of notice, that in the first revelation of himself, not confined
to individuals; indeed, in the very first revelation of his absolute being, Jehovah
at the same time revealed the fundamental truth of all philosophy, which must
either commence with the absolute, or have no fixed commencement; i e. cease
to be philosophy, t cannot but express my regret, that in the equivocal use of
the word that, for in that, or because, our admirable version has rendered the
passage susceptible of a degraded interpretation in the mind of common readers
or hearers, as if it were a mere reproof to an impertinent question, I am what I
am, which might be equally affirmed of himself by any existent being.
The Cartesian Cogito, ergo sum, is objectionable, because either the Cogito is
used extra Gradum, and then it is involved in the sum and is tautological, or it is
taken as a particular mode or dignity, and then it is subordinated to the sum as
the species to the genus; or, rather, as a particular modification to the subject
modified; and not pre-ordinated, as the arguments seem to require. For Cogito
is Sum Cogitans. This is clear by the inevidence of the converse. Cogitat ergo
est, is true, because it is a mere application of the logical rule: Quicquid in gene-
re est, est et in specie. Est (cogitans) ergo est. It is a cherry tree; therefore it
is a tree. But, est ergo cogitat, is illogical: for quod est in specie, non necessario
in genere est. It may be true. I hold it to be true, that quicquid vere est, est
per veram sui affirmationem j but it is a derivative, not an immediate truth.
Here, then, we have, by anticipation, the distinction between the conditional
finite I, (which, as known in distinct consciousness by occasion of experience, is
called, by Kant's followers, the impirical I,) and the absolute I am, and likewise the dependence, or rather the inherence of the former in the latter; in whom
"we live,and move, and have our being," as St. Paul divinely asserts, differing
widely from the Theists of the mechanic school, (as Sir J. Newton, Locke, &c.)
who must say from whom we had our being, and with it, life and the powers of life.

<page 160>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. \§Q
1
fore, this be the one only immediate truth, in the certainty of which
the reality of our collective knowledge is grounded, it must follow
that the spirit in all the objects which it views, views only itself.
If this could be proved, the immediate reality of all intuitive know-
ledge would be assured. It has been shown, that a spirit is that
which is its own object, yet not originally an object, but an absolute
subject forjwhich all, itself included, may become an object. It
must, therefore, be an act; for every object is, as an object, dead,
fixed, incapable in itself of any action, and necessarily finite.
Again: the spirit, (originally the identity of object and subject,)
must, in some sense, dissolve this identity, in order to be conscious of it: fit alter et idem. But this implies an act, and it follows,
therefore, that intelligence or self-consciousness is impossible, ex-
cept by and in a will. The self-conscious spirit, therefore, is a
will; and freedom must be assumed as a ground of philosophy, and
can never be deduced from it.
Thesis VIII.—Whatever in its origin is objective, is likewise
as such, necessarily infinite. Therefore, since the spirit is not ori-
•ginally an object, and as the subject exists in antithesis to an ob-
ject, the spirit cannot originally be finite. But neither can it be a
subject without becoming an object, and as it is originally the iden-
tity of both, it can be conceived neither as infinite or finite, exclu-
sively, but as the most original union of both. In the existence,
in the reconciling, and the recurrence of this contradiction, consists
the process and mystery of production and life.
Thesis IX.—This principium commune essendi et cognoscen-
di, as subsisting in a will, or primary act of self-duplication, is
the mediate or indirect principle of every science; but it is the im-
mediate and direct principle of the ultimate science alone, i. e. of
transcendental philosophy alone. For it must be remembered, that
all these Theses refer solely to one of the two Polar Sciences,
namely, to that which commences with, and rigidly confines itself
within the subjective, leaving the objective, (as far as it is exclu-
sively objective,) to natural philosophy, which is its opposite pole.
In its very idea, therefore, as a systematic knowledge of ourcollective
knowing, (scientia scientae,) it involves the necessity of some one
highest principle of knowing, as at once the source and the accom-
panying form in all particular acts of intellect and perception. This,

<page 161>
160 BIOGRAPMIA L1TERARIA.
it has been shown, can be found only in the act and evolution of
self-consciousness. We are not investigating an absolute principi-
um essendi; for then, I'admit, many valid objections might be start-
ed against our theory; but an absolute principium cognoscendi.
The result of both the sciences, or their equatorial point, would be
the principle of a total and undivided philosophy, as, for prudential
reasons, I have chosen to anticipate in the Scholium to Thesis VI. and the note subjoined. In other words, philosophy would pass
into religion, and religion become inclusive of philosophy. We
begin with the I know myself, in order to end with the absolute I
am. We proceed from the self, in order to lose and find all self
in God.
Thesis X.—The transcendental philosopher doesjnot inquire,
what ultimate ground of our knowledge there may lie out of our
knowing, but what is the last in our knowing itself, beyond which
we cannot pass. The principle of our knowing is sought within
the sphere of our knowing. It must be something, therefore, which
can itself be known. It-is asserted, only, that the act of self-consciousness is for us the source and principle of all our possible
knowledge. Whether, abstracted from us, there exists any thing
higher and beyond this primary self-knowing, which is for us the
form of all our knowing, must be decided by the result.
That the self-consciousness is the fixt point, to which for us all
is morticed and annexed, needs no further proof. But that the
self-consciousness may be the modification of a higher form of be-
ing, perhaps of a higher consciousness, and this again of a yet
higher, and so on in an infinite regressus; in short, that self-con-
sciousness may be itself something explicable into something, which
must lie beyond the possibility of our knowledge, because the whole
synthesis of our intelligence is first formed in and through the self-
consciousness, does not at all concern us as transcendental philos-
ophers. For to us the self-consciousness is not a kind of being,
but a kind of knowing, and that, too, the highest and farthest that
exists for us. It may however be shown, and basjin part already
been shown, in pages 74-75, that even when the Objective is as-
sumed as the first, we yet can never pass beyond the principle of
self-consciousness. Should we attempt it, we must be driven back
from ground to ground, each of which would cease to be ground

<page 162>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 161
the moment we pressed on it. We must be whirled down the gulph
of an infinite series. But this would make our reason bafHe the
end and purpose of all reason, namely, unity and system. Or we
must break off the system arbitrarily, and affirm an absolute some-
thing that is in and of itself at once cause and effect, (causa sui,)
subject and object, or, rather, the absolute identity of both. But
as this is inconceivable, except in a self-consciousness, it follows,
that even as natural philosophers we must arrive at the same prin-
ciple from which, as transcendental philosophers, we set out; that
is, in a self-consciousness in which the principium essendi does not
stand to the principium cognoscendi in the relation of cause to ef-
fect, but both the one and the other are co-inherent and identical.
Thus the true system of natural philosophy places the sole reality
of things in an absolute, which is at once causa sui et effectus,
tfafyp avToira7wj, Tiog savin—in the absolute identity of subject and
object, which it calls nature, and which in its highest power is no-
thing else but self-conscious will or intelligence. In this sense the
position of Malbranche, that we see all things in God, is a strict
philosophical truth; and equally true is the assertion of Hobbes,
of Hartley, and of their masters in ancient Greece, that all real
knowledge supposes a prior sensation. For sensation itself is but
vision nascent, not the cause of intelligence, but intelligence itself
revealed as an earlier power in the process of self-construction.
Maxag, i'Xadi fbei/
IlaJsj, 'i"kadi (Aoi
Ei tugu. xosfAov,
Ei iraga. poiguv
T(3v guv sdiyoi/ /
Bearing then this in mind, that intelligence is a'self-develop-
ment, not a quality supervening to a substance, we may abstract
from all degree, and for the purpose of philosophic construction,
reduce it to kind, under the idea of an indestructible power, with
two opposite and counteracting forces, which by a metaphor bor-
rowed from astronomy, we may call the centrifugal and centripedal
forces. The intelligence in the one tends to objeciize itself, and in
the other to know itself in the object. It will be hereafter my busi-
ness to construct, by a series of intuitions, the progressive schemes
20 >.

<page 163>
162 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARlA.
that must follow from such a power with such forces, till I arrive
at the fulness of the human intelligence. For my present purpose,
I assume such a power as my principle, in order to deduce from it
a faculty, the generation, agency, and application of which form the
contents of the ensuing chapter.
In a preceding page I have justified the use of technical terms in
philosophy, whenever they tend to preclude confusion of thought,
and when they assist the memory by the exclusive singleness of
their meaning more than they may, for a short time, bewilder the
attention by their strangeness. I trust, that I have not extended
this privilege beyond the grounds on which I have claimed it;
namely, the conveniency of the scholastic phrase to distinguish the
kind from all degrees, or rather to express the kind with the ab-
straction of degree, as, for instance, multeity instead of multitude;
or, secondly, for the sake of correspondence in sound and interde-
pendent or antithetical terms, as subject and object; or, lastly, to
avoid the wearying recurrence of circumlocutions and definitions.
Thus I shall venture to use potence, in order to express a specific
degree of power, in imitation of the algebraists. I have even haz-
arded the new verb potenziate, with its derivatives, in order to ex-
press the combination or transfer of powers. It is with new or
unusual terms, as with privileges in courts of justice or legislature;
there can be no legitimate privilege, where there already exists a
positive law adequate to the purpose; and when there is no law in
existence, the privilege is to be justified by its accordance with the
end, or final cause of all law. Unusual and new-coined words are
doubtless an evil; but vagueness, confusion, and imperfect con-
veyance of our thoughts, are a far greater. Every system, which
is under the necessity of using terms not familiarized by the meta-
physics in fashion, will be described as written in an unintelligible
style, and the author must expect the charge of having substituted
learned jargon for clear conception; while, according to the creed
of our modern philosophers, nothing is deemed a clear conception,
but what is representable by a distinct image. Thus the conceiva-
ble is reduced within the bounds of the picturable. Hiac patet, qui
fiat ut, «um irreprasentable et impossibile vulgo ejusdem sigmfica-
tus habeantur, conceptus tarn Continui, quam infiniti, a plurimis
rejeciantur, quippe quorum, secundum leges cognitionis inluitivoz,
reprsesentatio est impossibilis. Quanquam autem harum e non

<page 164>
BIOGHATHIA LITERA.HIA. 163
paucis scholis explosarum notionum, praesertim prioris, causam hie
non gero, maximi tamen momenti erit monuisse r gravissimo illos errore labi, qui tam perversa argumentandi ratione utuntur. Quic-
quid enim repug-nai.legibus intellectus et rationis, utique est im- possibile; quod autem, cum rationis purse sit objectum, legibus
cognitionis intuitivse tantummpdo non subest, non item. Nam hinc
dissensus inter faeultatem sensilwam et intellectualem, (qu.arem in-
dolem mox exponam) nihil indigitat, nisi, quas mens ab intellectu
accerptasfert ideas abstractas, Mas in concrete exequi, et in Intuitus
commutare saspenumero non posse. Haec autem reluctantia subjec-
iiva mentitur, ut plurimum,'repugnantiam aliquam objectivam, et
incautos facile fallit, limitibus, quibus mens humana circuscribitur, pro iis habitis, quibus ipsa rerum essentia continetur.*—Kant de
JVLundi Sensibilis atque Intelligibilis forma et principiis, 1770.
Critics, who are most ready to bring this charge of pedantry and
unintelligibility, are the most apt to overlook the important fact,
that beside the language of words, there is a language of spirits,
(sermo interior,) and that the former is only the vehicle of the lat-
ter. Consequently, their assurance, that they do net understand
the philosophic writer, instead of proving any thing against the phi-
losophy, may furnish an equal and (cseteris paribus) even a strong-
er presumption against their own philosophic talent.
Great indeed are the obstacles which an English metaphysician
* Translation.—" Hence it is clear, from what cause many reject the notion of
the continuous and the infinite. They take, namely, the words irrepresentable
and impossible, in one and the same meaning; and, according to the forms of
sensuous evidence, the notion of the continuous and the infinite is doubtless im-
possible. I am not now pleading the cause of these laws, which not a few
schools have thought proper to explode, especially the former (the law of conti-
nuity.) But it is of the highest importance to admonish the reader, that those
who adopt so perverted a mode of reasoning, are under a grievous error. What-
ever opposes the formal principles of the understanding and the reason, is con-
fessedly impossible; but not therefore that which is therefore not amenable to
the forms of sensuous evidence, because it is exclusively an object of pure intel-
lect. For this non-coincidence of the sensuous and the intellectual, (the nature
of which I shall presently lay open,) proves nothing more but that the mind can-
not always adequately represent in the concrete, and transform into distinct ima-
ges, abstract notions derived from the pure intellect. But this contradiction,
which is in itself merely subjective, (i. e. an incapacity in the nature of man,) too
often passes for an incongruity or impossibility in the object, (i. e. the notions
themselves,) and seduce the incautious to mistake the limitations of the human
faculties for the limits of things, as they really exist."
I take this occasion to observe, that here and elsewhere, Kant uses the teAns
intuition, and the verb active intueri, (Germanice anschauen) for which we have
unfortunately no correspondent word, exclusively for that which can be repre-
sented in space and time. He therefore consistently, and rightly, denies the
possibility of intellectual intuitions. But as I see no adequate reason for this
exclusive sense of the term, I have reverted to its wider signification authorized
by our elder theologians and metaphysicians, according to whom the term com-
prehends all truths known to us without a medium.

<page 165>
164 BI0GRAPH1A LITERAIUA.
has to encounter. Amongst his most respectable and intelligent
judges, there will be many who have devoted their attention exclu-
sively to the concerns and interests of human life, and who bring
with them to«the perusal of a philosophic system an habitual aver-
sion to all speculations, the utility and application of which are not
evident and immediate. To these I would, in the first instance,
merely oppose an authority which they themselves hold venerable,
that of Lord Bacon: non inutile scientife existimande sunt, quarum
in se nullus est usus, si ingenia acuant et ordinent.
There are others, whose prejudices are still more formidable,
inasmuch as they are grounded in their moral feelings and religious
principles, which had been alarmed and shocked by the impious
and pernicious tenets defended by Hume, Priestly, and the French
fatalists or necessitarians; some of whom had perverted metaphy-
sical reasonings to the denial of the mysteries, and, indeed, of all
the peculiar doctrines of Christianity; and others even to the sub-
version of all distinction between right and wrong. I would re-
quest such men to consider what an eminent and successful defend-
er of the christian faith has observed, that true metaphysics are
nothing else but true divinity, and that in fact the writers who have
given them such just offence, were sophists, who had taken advan-
tage of the general neglect into which the science of logic has un-
happily fallen, rather than metaphysicians, a name, indeed, which
those writers were the first to explode as unmeaning. Secondly,
I would remind them, that as long as there are men in the world
to whom the Vvuxi g^xurov is an instinct and a command from their
own nature, so long will there be metaphysicians and metaphysical
speculations; that false metaphysics can be effectually counteract-
ed by true metaphysics alone; and that if the reasoning be clear,
solid, and pertinent, the truth deduced can never be the less valu-
able on account of the depth from which it may have been drawn.
A third class profess themselves friendly to metaphysics, and
believe that they are themselves metaphysicians. They have no objection to system or terminology, provided it be the method and
the nomenclature to which they have been familiarized in the wri-
tings of Locke, Hume, Hartley, Condillac, or, perhaps, Dr. Reid
and Professor Stewart. To objections from this cause, it is a
sufficient answer, that one main object of my attempt was to de-
monstrate the vagueness or insufficiency of the terms used in the

<page 166>
MOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 165
metaphysical schools of France and Great Britain since the revolu-
tion, and that the errors which I propose to attack cannot subsist,
except as they are concealed behind the mask of a plausible and
indefinite nomenclature.
But the worst and widest impediment still remains. It is the
predominance of a popular philosophy, at once the counterfeit and
the mortal enemy of all true and manly metaphysical research. It
is that corruption, introduced by certain immethodical aphorisming
Eclectics, who, dismissing, not only all system, but all logical con-
nexion, pick and choose whatever is most plausible and showy;
who select whatever words can have some semblance of sense at-
tached to them without the least expenditure of thought; in short,
whatever may enable men to talk of what they do not understand,
with a careful avoidance of every thing that might awaken them to
a moment's suspicion of their ignorance. This, alas! is an irreme-
diable disease, for it brings with it, not so much an indisposition to
any particular system, but an utter loss of taste and faculty for all
system and for all philosophy. Like echoes, that beget each other
amongst the mountains, the praise or blame of such men rolls in
volleys long after the report from the original blunderbuss. Se-
quacitas est potius et coitio quam consensus: et tamen (quod pes-
simum est) pusillanimitas ista non sine arrogantia et fastidio si
offert. Novum Organum.
I shall now proceed to the nature and genesis of the imagina-
tion; but I must first take leave to notice, that after a more accu-
rate perusal of Mr. Wordsworth's remarks on the imagination, in
his preface to the new edition of his poems, I find that my conclu-
sions are not so consentient with his, as, I confess, I had taken for
granted. In an article contributed by me to Mr. Southey's Om-
niana, on the soul and its organs of sense, are the following sen-
tences: "These (the human faculties) I would arrange under the
different senses and powers; as the eye, the ear, the touch, &c.;
the imitative power, voluntary and automatic; the imagination,.or
shaping and modifying power; the fancy, or the aggregative and as-
sociative power; the understanding, or the regulative, substantiating
and realizing power; the speculative reason—vis theoretica et sci-
entifica, or the power by which we produce, or aim to produce,
unity, necessity, and universality in all our knowledge, by means of

<page 167>
166 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
principles a priori; * the will, or practical reason; the faculty of
choice (Germanice, Willkuhr) and (distinct both from the moral
will and the choice) the sensation of volition, which I have found
reason to include under the head of single and double touch." To
this, as far as it relates to the subject in question, namely, the
words (the aggregative and associative power) Mr. Wordsworth's
"only objection is, that the definition is too general. To aggre-
gate and to associate, to evoke and combine, belong as well to the
imagination as the fancy." I reply, that if by the power of evoking
and combining, Mr. W. means the same as, and no more than, I
meant by the aggregative and associative, I continue to deny, that
it belongs at all to the imagination; and I am disposed to conjec-
ture, that he has mistaken the co-presence of fancy with imagina-
tion for the operation of the latter singly. A man may work with
two very different tools at the same moment; each has its share in
the work, but the work effected by each is distinct and different.
But it will probably appear in the next Chapter, that deeming it
necessary to go back much further than Mr. Wordsworth's subject
required or permitted, I have attached a meaning to both fancy and
imagination, which he had not in view, at least while he was writing
that preface. He will judge. Would to heaven, I might meet
with many such readers. I will conclude with the words of Bishop
Jeremy Taylor: he to whom all things are one, who draweth all
things to one, and seeth all things in one, may enjoy true peace and
rest of spirit. (J. Taylor's Via Pacis.)
* This phrase, a priori, is in common most grossly misunderstood, and an ab-
surdity burthened on it, which it does not deserve! By knowledge, apriori, we
do not mean, that we can know anything previously to experience, which would
be a contradiction in terms; but, that having once known it by occasion of expe-
rience, (i. e. something acting upon us from without,) we then know, that it
must have pre-existed, or the experience itself would have been impossible. By
experience only, I know that I have eyes; but, then my reason convinces me,
that I must have had eyes in order to the experience.

<page 168>
CHAPTER XIII.
On the imagination, or esemplastic powerV
• O Adam! one Almighty is, from whom All things proceed, and up to him return, If not depraved from good: created all Such to perfection, one first nature all Indued with various forms, various degrees Of substance, and in things that live, of life JBut more refin'd, more spirituous and pure, As nearer to him placed or nearer tending, Each in their several active spheres assign'd, Till body up to spirit work, in bounds Proportion'd to each kind. So from the root Springs lighter the green stalk: from thence the leaves More airy: last, the bright consummate flower Spirits odorous breathes. Flowers and their fruit, Man's nourishment, by gradual scale sublim'd, To vital spirits aspire: to animal:_.To intellectual!—give both life and sense, Fancy and understanding: whence the soul Reason receives. And reason is her being, Discursive or intuitive. -
Par. Lost, b. v.
"Sane si res corporalesnil nisi materiale continerent, verissime dicerentur in
fluxu consistere neque habere substantiate quicquam, quemadmodum et Platonici
olim recte agnovere.—Hinc igitur, praeter pure mathematica et phantasiae sub-
jecta, collegi qusedaminetaphysica solaque mente perceptibilia, esse admittenda:
et massse materiali principium quoddam superius et, ut sic dicam,Jbrmale adden-
dum: quandoquidem omnes ventates rerum corporearum ex soils axiomatibus
logisticis et geometricis, nempe de magno et parvo, toto et parte, figura et situ,
colligi non possint; sed alia de causa et effectu, actioneque et passione, accedere
debeant, quibus ordinis rerum rationes salventur. Id principium rerum, an
Sv7sXsj£Siccv an vim appelemus, non refert, modo meminerimus, per solam Vi-
riiim notionem intelligibiliter explicari."
Leibhit?: Op. T. II. P. II. p. 53.—T, III. p. 321.
2^§o{iar Nospwv
Kouipi'av <raj;iv
Xwosi TI ME20N
Ou xala-)Qi6sv.
Synesii, Hymn III. I. 231.
Des Cartes, speaking as a naturalist, and in imitation of Ar-
chimedes, said, give me matter and motion, and I will construct

<page 169>
16S BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
you the universe. We must of course understand him to have
meant: I will render the construction of the universe intelligible.
In the same sense the transcendental philosopher says, grant me a
nature having two contrary forces, the one of which tends to ex-
pand infinitely, while the other strives to apprehend or find itself in
this infinity, and I will cause the world of intelligences, with the
whole system of their representations, to rise up before you. Eve-
ry other science pre-supposes intelligence as already existing and
complete: the philosopher contemplates it in its growth, and, as it
were, represents its history to the mind from its birth to its maturity.
The venerable Sage of Koenigsberg has preceded the march of
this master-thought as arfeffective pioneer in his essay on the in-
troduction of negative quantities into philosophy, published 1763.
In this, he has shown, that instead of assailing the science of math-
ematics by metaphysics, as Berkley did in his Analyst, or of so-
phisticating it, as Wolff did, by the vain attempt of deducing the
first principles of geometry from supposed deeper grounds of on-
tology, it behooved the metaphysician rather to examine whether
the only province of knowledge, which man has succeeded in erect-
ing into a pure science, might not furnish materials, or at least
hints for establishing and pacifying the unsettled, warring, and em-
broiled domain of philosophy. An imitation of the mathematical
method, had indeed been attempted with no better success than at-
tended the essay of David to wear the armour of Saul. Another
use, however, is possible, and of far greater promise, namely, the
actual application of the positions which had'so wonderfully en-
larged the discoveries of geometry, mutatis mutandis, to philo-
sophical subjects. Kant, having briefly illustrated the utility of
such an attempt in the questions of space, motion, and infinitely
small quantities, as employed by the mathematician, proceeds to
the idea of negative quantities and the transfer of them to metaphy-
sical investigation. Opposites, he well observes, are of two kinds,
either logical, i. e. such as are absolutely incompatible; or real,
without being contradictory. The former, he denominates Nihil
negativum irrepraesentabile, the connexion of which produces non-
sense. A body in motion is something—Aliquid cogitabile; but a
body, at one and the same time in motion and not in motion, is
nothing, or, at most, air articulated into nonsense. But a motary
force of a body in one direction, and an equal force of the same

<page 170>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 169
body in an opposite direction is not incompatible, and the result,
namely, rest, is real and representable. For the purposes of mathe-
matical calculus, it is indifferent which force we term negative, and
which positive, and consequently, we appropriate the latter to that
which happens to be the principal object in our thoughts. Thus,
if a man's capital be ten and his debts eight, the subtraction will be
the same, whether we call the capital negative debt, or the debt negative capital. But in as much as the latter stands practically
in reference to the former, we of course represent the sum as
10—8. It is equally clear, that two equal forces acting in opposite
directions, both being finite, and each distinguished from the other
by its direction only, must neutralize or reduce each other to inac-
tion. Now the transcendental philosophy demands, first, that two
forces should be conceived which counteract each other by their
essential nature; not only not in consequence of the accidental di-
rection of each, but as prior to all direction, nay, as the primary
forces from which the conditions of all possible directions are de-
rivative and deducible: secondly, that these forces should be as-
sumed to be both alike infinite, both alike indestructible. The
problem will then be to discover the result or product of two such
forces, as distinguished from the result of those forces which are
finite, and derive their difference solely from the circumstance of
their direction. When we have formed a scheme or outline of
these two different kinds of force, and of their different results by
the process of discursive reasoning, it will then remain for us to
elevate the Thesis from notional to actual, by contemplating intu-
itively this one power with its two inherent, indestructible, yet
counteracting forces, and the results or generations to which their
inter-penetration gives existence, in the living principle, and in the
process of our own self-consciousness. By what instrument this
is possible, the solution itself will discover, at the same time that
it will reveal to, and for whom it is possible. Non omnia possu-
mes omnes. There is a philosophic, no less than a poetic genius,
which is differenced from the highest perfection of talent, not by
degree, but by kind.
The counteraction, then, of the two assumed forces, does not de-
pendon their meeting from opposite directions; the power which acts in them is indestructible; it is, therefore, inexhaustibly re- ebullient; and as something must be the result of these two forces, 21

<page 171>
170 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
both alike infinite, and both alike indestructible; and, as rest or
neutralization cannot be this result, no other conception is possible,
but that the product must be a tertium aliquid, or finite generation.
Consequently, this conception is necessary. Now this tertium
aliquid can be no other than an interpenetration of the counteract-
ing powers partaking of both
Thus far had the work been transcribed for the press, when I
received the following letter from a friend, whose practical judg-
ment I have had ample reason to estimate and revere, and whose
taste and sensibility preclude all the excuses which my self-love
might possibly have prompted me to set up in plea against the de-
cision of advisers of equal good sense, but with less tact and feeling.
"Dear C—
"You ask my opinion concerning your chapter on the imagination, both
as to the impressions it made on myself, and as to those which I think it
will make on the public, i. e. that part of the public who, from the title of
the work, and from its forming a sort of introduction to a volume of poems,
are likely to constitute the great majority of your readers,
"As to myself, and stating, in the first place, the effect on my under-'
standing, your opinions, and method of argument, were not only so new to-
me, but so directly the reverse of all I had ever been accustomed to con-
sider as truth, that, even if I had comprehended your premises sufficiently
to have admitted them, and had seen the necessity of your conclusions, I
should still have been in that state of mind, which, in your note, p. 50,
you have so ingeniously evolved, as the antithesis to that in which a man
is when he makes a bull. In your own words, I should have felt as if I
had been standing on my head.
"The effect on my feelings, on the other hand; I cannot better repre-
sent, than by supposing myself to have known only our light, airy, modern
chapels of ease, and then, for the first time, to have been placed, and left
alone, in one of our largest Gsthic cathedrals, in a gusty moonlight night
of autumn. 'Now in glimmer, and now in gloom;' often in palpable dark-
ness, not without a chilly sensation of terror; then suddenly emerging into
broad, yet visionary, lights, with coloured shadows of fantastic shapes, yet
all decked with holy insignia and mystic symbols; and, ever and anon,
coming out full upon pictures, and stone-work images of great men, with
■whose names I was familiar, but which looked upon me with countenances
and an expression, the most dissimilar to all I had been in the habit of
connecting with those names. Those whom I had been taught to vene-
rate as almost super-human in magnitude of intellect, I found perched in

<page 172>
BIOGRAPHIA. LITERARIA. 171
little fret-work niches, as grotesque dwarfs; while the grotesques, in my
hitherto belief, stood guarding the high altar with all the characters of
Apotheosis. In short, what I had supposed substances, were thinned
away into shadows, while, every where, shadows were deepened into sub-
stances:
If substance maybe called what shadow seem'd,
For each seem'd either!
Milton.
"Yet, after all, I could not but repeat the lines which you had quoted
from a MS. poem of your own in the Friend, and applied to a work of
Mr. Wordsworth's, though with a few of the words ajtered:
"An orphic tale indeed,
A tale obscure, of high and passionate thoughts
To a strange music chaunted!"
"Be assured, however, that I look forward anxiously to your great
book on the constructive philosophy, which you have promised and an-
nounced; and that I will do my best to understand it. Only, I will not promise to descend into the dark cave of Trophonius with you, there to
rub my own eyes, in order to make the sparks and figured flashes which I
am required to see.
"So much for myself. But, as for the public, I do not hesitate a mo-
ment in advising and urging you to withdraw the chapter from the present
work, and to reserve it for your announced treatises on the Logos or com-
municative intellect in Man and Deity. First, because, imperfectly as
I understand the present chapter, I see clearly that you have done too
much, and yet not enough. You have been obliged to omit so many links from the necessity of compression, that what remains, looks, (if I may re-
cur to my former illustration,) like the fragments of the winding steps of
an old ruined tower. Secondly, a still stronger argument, (at least, one
that I am sure will be more forcible with you,) is, that your readers will
have both right and reason to complain of you. This chapter, which can-
not, when it is printed, amount to so little as an hundred pages, will, of
necessity, greatly increase the expense of the work; and every reader
who, like myself, is neither prepared, or, perhaps, calculated for the study
of so abstruse a subject so abstrusely treated, will, as I have before hinted,
be almost entitled to accuse you of a sort of imposition on him. For
who, he might truly observe, could, from your title-page, viz: "ffll£
Ufterarfi fLftt attfr ©JJtnfOnS," published, too, as introductory
to a volume of miscellaneous poems, have anticipated, or even conjectured,
a long treatise on ideal Realism, which holds the same relation, in ab-
struseness, to Plotinus, as Plotinus does to Plato. It will be well if, alV

<page 173>
172 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARtA.
ready, you have not too much of metaphysical disquisition in your work,
though, as the larger part of the disquisition is historical, it will, doubtless,
be both interesting and instructive to many, to whose unprepared minds
your speculations on the esemplastic power would be utterly unintelligible.
Be assured, if you do publish this chapter in the present work, you will be
reminded of Bishop Berkley's Siris, announced as an Essay on Tar-water,
which, beginning with tar, ends with the Trinity, the omne scibile forming
the interspace, I say in the present work. In that greater work to which
you have devoted so many years, and study so intense and various, it will
be in its proper place. Your prospectus will have described and announ-
ced both its contents and their nature; and if any persons purchase it, who
feel no interest in the subjects of which it treats, they will have them-
selves only to blame.
"I could add, to these arguments, one derived from pecuniary motives,
and particularly from the probable effects on the sale of your present pub-
lication; but they would weigh little with you, compared with the prece-
ding. Besides, I have long observed, that arguments drawn from your
own personal interests, more often act on you as narcotics than as stimu-
lants, and that, in money concerns, you have some small portion of pig-
nature in your moral idiosyncracy, and, like these amiable creatures, must,
occasionally, be pulled backward from the boat in order to make you enter
it. All success attend you, for if hard thinking and hard reading are
merits, you have deserved it.
Your affectionate, &c."
In consequence of this very judicious letter, which produced
complete conviction on my mind, I shall content myself for the
present with stating the main result of the Chapter, which I have
reserved for that future publication, a detailed prospectus of which
the reader will find at the close of the second volume.
The imagination, then, I consider either as primary or second-
ary. The primary imagination I hold to be the living Power and
prime Agent of all human Perception, and as a repetition in the
finite mind of the eternal act of creation in the infinite I am. The
secondary I consider as an echo of the former, co-existing with the
conscious will, yet still as identical with the primary in the kind of
its agency, and differing only in degree, and in the mode of its ope-
ration. It dissolves, diffuses, dissipates, in order to re-create; or,
where this process is rendered impossible, yet still, at all events, it
struggles to idealize and to unify. It is essentially vital, even as
all objects (as objects) are essentially fixed and dead.
Fancy, on the contrary, has no other counters to play with, but

<page 174>
BIOGRAPHIA LITEIIAIUA. 173
fixities and definities. The Fancy is, indeed, no other than a mode
of Memory emancipated from the order of time and space, and
blended with, and modified by, that empirical phenomenon of the
will which we express by the word choice. But, equally with the
ordinary memory, it must receive all its materials ready made from
the law of association.
Whatever, more than this, I shall think it fit to declare, concern-
ing the powers and privileges of the imagination, in the present
work, will be found in the critical essay on the uses of the super-
natural in poetry, and the principles that regulate its introduction;
which the reader will find prefixed to the poem of 5CJ)C glflXtttlt
Jftarfunr.
<^ ,, J ('1 V^-eHUcr>vC- ^ t

<page 175>
i
iC flew
CHAPTER XIV.
Occasion of the Lyrical Ballads, and the objects originally proposed—Preface to
the second edition—The ensuing controversy, its causes and acrimony—Philo-
sophic definitions of a poem, and poetry with scholia.
During the first year that Mr. Wordsworth and I were neigh-
bours, our conversations turned frequently on the two cardinal
points of poetry, the power of exciting the sympathy of the reader
by a faithful adherence tojthe h-uth or nature^and the power ofgiv-
ing the interest of novelty, by the modifying colours of imagina-
tion. The sudden charm, which accidents of light and shade,
which moon-light or sun-set, diffused over a known and familiar
landscape, appeared to represent the practicability of combining
both. These are the poetry of nature. The thought suggested
itself, (to which of us I do not recollect,) that a series of poems
might be composed of two sorts. In the one, the incidents and
agents were to be, in part at least, supernatural; and the excellence
aimed at, was to consist in the interesting of the affections by the
dramatic truth of such emotions, as would naturally accompany
such situations, supposing them real. And real in this sense they
have been to every human being who, from whatever source of de-
lusion, has at any time believed himself under supernatural agency.
For the second class, subjects were to be chosen from ordinary
life; the characters and incidents were to be such as will be found
in every village and its vicinity, where there is a meditative and
feeling mind to seek after them, or to notice them, when they pre-
sent themselves.
In this idea originated the plan of the "Lyrical Ballads;" in
whkbji was agreed that my endeavours shouki^jdjrectedtg_gejc-
sojis and characters supernatural, 01^at least romantic i jet spjjsJto
transfer^ from our inward nature a human interest, and a semblance
of truth sufficient to procure for these shadows of imagination that
( ''■ willing. suspension of disbelief for the moment, which cpnstitutfig
poetip faith. Mr. Wordsworth, on the other hand, was to propose
to himself, as his object, to give the charm of novelty to things of
every day, and to excite a feeling analogous to the supernatural, by

<page 176>
BIOGRAPHIA LITEHAIUA. 175
awakening the mind's attention from the lethargy of custom, and
directing it to the loveliness and the wonders of the world before
us; an inexhaustible treasure, but for which, in consequence of the
film of familiarity and selfish solicitude, we have^eyeSjLjet_see not,
ears that hear not, and hearts that neither feel nor understand.
With this view, I wrote the " Ancient Mariner," and was prepar-
ing, among other poems, the " Dark Ladie," and the " Christobel,"
in which I should have more nearly realized my ideal, than I had
done in my first attempt. But Mr. Wordsworth's industry, had
proved so much more successful, and the number of his poems so
much greater, that my compositions, instead of forming a balance,
appeared rather an interpolation of heterogeneous matter. Mr.
Wordsworth added two or three poems written in his own character,
in the impassioned, lofty, and sustained diction, which is character-
istic of his genius. In this form, the "Lyrical Ballads" were pub-
lished; and were presented by him, as an experiment, whether sub-
jects, which, from their nature, rejected the usual ornaments and
extra-colloquial style of poems in general, might not be so managed
in the language of ordinary life, as to produce the pleasurable in-
terest which it is the peculiar business of poetry to impart. To the
second edition he added a preface of considerable length; in which,
notwithstanding some passages of apparently a contrary import, he
was understood to contend for the extension of this style to poetry
of all kinds, and to reject as vicious and indefensible all phrases
and forms of style that were not included in what he (unfortunate-
ly, I think, adopting an equivocal expression,) called the language
of real life. From this preface, prefixed to poems in which it was
impossible to deny the presence of original genius, however mista-
ken its direction might be deemed, arose the whole long continued
controversy. For from the conjunction of perceived power with
supposed heresy, I explain the inveteracy, and in some instances, I
grieve to say, the acrimonious passions, with which the controversy
has been conducted by the assailants.
Had Mr. Wordsworth's poems been the silly, the childish things,
which they were for a long time described as being ; had they been
really distinguished from the compositions of other poets, merely by
meanness of language and inanity of thought; had they, indeed,
contained nothing more than what is found in the parodies, and pre-
tended imitations of them; they must have sunk at once, a dead


<page 177>
176 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARY.

weight, into the sloughjsf oblivion, and have dragged the preface
along with them. But year after year increased the number of Mr.
Tjyy»rjgWorth's admjrers. They were found, too, not in the lower
classes of the reading public, but chiefly among young men of strong
sensibility and meditative minds ; and their admiration (inflamed,
prehaps, in some degree by opposition) was distinguished by its in-
tensity, I might almost say by its religious fervour. These facts,
and the intellectual energy of the author, which was more or less
consciously felt, where it was outwardly and even boisterously de-
nied; meeting with sentiments of aversion to his opinions, and of
alarm at their consequences, produced an eddy of criticism, which
would, of itself, have borne up the poems by the violence with
which it whirled them round and round. With many parts of this
preface, in the sense attributed to them, and which the words un-
doubtedly seem to authorize, I never concurred; but, on the con-
trary, objected to them as erroneous in principle, and as contradic-
tory (in appearance at least) both to other parts of the same preface,
and to the author's own practice in the greater number of the po-
ems themselves. Mr. Wordsworth, in his recent collection, has,
I find, degraded this prefatory disquisition to the end of his second
volume, to be read or not at the reader's choice. But he has not,
as far as I can discover, announced any change in his poetic creed.
At all events, considering it as the source of a controversy, in
which I have been honoured more than I deserve, by the frequent
conjunction of my name with his, I think it expedient to declare, once for all, in what points I coincide with his opinions, and in what
points I altogether differ. But in order to render myself intelligi-
ble, I must previously, in as few words as possible, explain my
ideas, first, of a poem; and, secondly, of poetry itself, in kind,
and in essence.
The office of philosophical disquisition consists in just distinc-
tion; while it is the privilege of the philosopher to preserve himself
constantly aware, that distinction is not division. In order to ob-
tain adequate notions of any truth, we must intellectually separate
its distinguishable parts; and this is the technical process of philos-
ophy. But having so done, we must then restore them in our con-
ceptions to the unity, in which they actually co-exist; and this is
the result of philosophy. A poem contains the same elements as
a prose composition; the difference, therefore, must consist in a

<page 178>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 177

different combination of them, in consequence of a different object
proposed. According to the difference of the object will be the
difference of the combination. It is possible, that the object maybe merely to facilitate the recollection of any given facts or obser-
vations, by artificial arrangement; and the composition will be a
poem, merely because it is distinguished from prose by metre, or
by rhyme, or by both conjointly. In this, the lowest sense, a man
might attribute the name of a poem to the well known enumeration
of the days in the several months:
"Thirty days hath September,
April, June, and November," &c.
and others of the same class and purpose. And as a particular
pleasure is found in anticipating the recurrence of sounds and
quantities, all compositions that have this charm superadded, what-
ever be their contents, may be entitled poems.
So much for the superficial form. A difference of object and
contents supplies an additional ground of distinction. The imme-
diate purpose may be the cjjmmunication^oftruths; either of truth /• «^<i^</J^'-'absolute and demonstrable, as in works of science; or of facts 4 •experienced and recorded,as in history. P]ejtsjirej_and[that. of tlje, F^^J(*~*~'
highest and most permanent kind, may result froi^faejittoinment r Jf/*j***'r"i
of the end; buHt is not itself the immediate end. In other works
the communication of pleasure may be, the immediate purpose;
and though truth, either moral or intellectual, ought to be the ulti-
mate end, yet this will distinguish the character of the author, not
the class to which the work belongs. Blest, indeed, is that state
of society, in which the immediate purpose would be baffled by the
perversion of the proper ultimate end; in which no charm of dic-
tion or imagery could exempt the Bathyllus even of an Anacreon,
or the Alexis of Virgil, from disgust and aversion!
But the communication of pleasure may be the immediate object
of a work not metrically composed ; and that object may have been
in a high degree attained, as in novels and romances. Would then
the mere superaddition of metre, with or without rhyme, entitle
these to the name of poems 1 The answer is, that nothing can per-
manently please, which does not contain in itself the reason why
it is so, and not otherwise. If metre be superadded, all other parts
must be made consonant with it. They must be such as to justify
22

<page 179>
178
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
the perpetual and distinct attention to each part, which an exact
correspondent recurrence of accent and sound are calculated to
excite. The final definition, then, so deduced, may be thus word-
ed: A poem is that species of composition, which is opposed to
works of science, by proposing for its immediate object pleasure,
not truth; and from all other species, (having this object in common
with it,) it is discriminated by proposing to itself such delight from
ihsjwhoh, as is compatible with a distinct gratification from each
component part.
Controversy is not seldom excited, in consequence of the disputants attaching each a different meaning to the same word; and
in few instances has this been more striking than in disputes con-
cerning the present subject. If a man chooses to call every com-
position a poem which is rhyme, or measure, or both, I must leave
his opinion uncontroverted. The distinction is at least competent
to characterize the writer's intention. If it were subjoined, that the
whole is likewise entertaining or affecting, as a tale, or as a series
of interesting reflections, I of course admit this as another fit in-
gredient of a poem, and an additional merit. But if the definition
sought fox he. that s£,^e^t%xA9US9^J^tXJSS!^Xi}Sj^^^.9^t
the parts of which mutually support and explain each other; all in their proportion harmonizing with, and supporting the purposejand
kji.own influences of metrical arrangement. The philosophic crit-
ics of all ages coincide with the ultimate judgment of all countries,
in equally denying the praises of a just poem, on the one hand, to
a series of striking lines or distichs, each of which, absorbing the
whole attention of the reader to itself, disjoins it from its context,
and makes it a separate whole, instead of an harmonizing part; and
on the other hand, to an unsustained composition, from which the
reader collects rapidly the general result, unattracted by the com-
ponent parts. The reader should be carried forward, not merely,
or chiefly, by the mechanical impulse of curiosity, or by a restless
desire to arrive at the final solution; but by the pleasurable.aclivity
of mind, excited by the attractionsof Jhe_jpurneyJtself. Like the
motion of a serpent, which the Egyptians made the emblem of in-
tellectual power; or like the path of sound through the air; at every
step he pauses, and half recedes, and, from the retrogressive move-
ment, collects the force which again carries him onward. Precipi-
tandus est liber spiritus, says Petronius Arbiter, most happily. The


<page 180>
felOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 17§
epithet, liber, here balances the preceding verb; and it is not easy
to conceive more meaning, condensed in fewer words.
But if this should be admitted as a satisfactory character of a
poem, we have still to seek for a definition of poetry. The wri-
tings of Plato, and Bishop Taylor, and the Theoria Sacra of
Burnet, furnish undeniable proofs that poetry of the highest kind
may exist without metre, and even without the contra-distinguish-
ing objects of a poem. The first chapter of Isaiah, (indeed a very
large portion of the whole book,) is poetry in the most emphatic
sense; yet it would be not less irrational than strange to assert,
that pleasure, and not truth, was the immediate object of the proph-
et. In short, whatever specific-import we attach to the word poet-
ry, there will be found■ ■involved in it, as a necessary consequence,
that a poem of any length neither can be, or ought to be, all poetry.
Yet if an harmonious whole is to be produced, the remaining parts
must be preserved in keeping with the poetry; and this can be no
otherwise effected than by such a studied selection and artificial
arrangement as will partake of one, though not a peculiar, property
■of poetry. And this, again, can be no other than the property of
*J.citing_a more continuous and equal attention, than the language
of prose aims at, whether colloquial or written.
My own conclusions on the nature of poetry, in the strictest use
of the word, have been, in part, anticipated in the preceding disqui-
sition on the fancy and imagination. What is poetry? is so nearly
the same question with, what is a poet? that the answer to the one
is involved in the solution of the other. For it is a distinction re-
sulting from the poetic genius itself, which sustains and modifies
the images, thoughts and emotions of the poet's own mind. The poet, described in ideal perfection, bringsJ.he_whole_Soul QjC.man
into_activity, with the subordination of its faculties to each other,
according to their relative worth and dignity. He diffuses a tone
and spirit of unity, that blends, and, (as it were^fasei, each into
each, by that synthetic and magical p.aw^r^Jo_wjusijyje_haEe_exciu-
siyely appropriated the name of imagination. This power, first
put in action by the will and understanding, and retained under
their irremissive, though gentle and unnoticed, controul, (laxis effer-
tur habenis,) reveals itself in the balance or reconciliation of oppo-
JLJte,or discordant qualities; of samenessjjsvith differense.; of the
SeJ??.r^lLw't'1 *^!L55I^^J.*teJS'e.?-tZ!ltL^eJHSg* j ^e individual,


<page 181>
160 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
with the representative; the sense of novelty and freshness, with
old and familiar objects; a more than usual state of emotion, with
more than usual order; judgment, ever awake, and steady self-pos-
session, with enthusiasm and feeling profound or vehement; and
while it blends and harmonizes the natural and the artificial, still
subordinates art to nature; the manner to the matter: and our ad-
miration of the poet to our sympathy with the poetry. "Doubt-
less," as Sir John Davies observes of the soul, (and his words
may, with slight alteration, be applied, and even more appropriate-
ly, to the poetic imagination :)
"Doubtless this could not be, but that she turns
Bodies to spirit by sublimation strange,
As fire converts to fire the things it burns,
As we our food into our nature change.
From their gross matter she abstracts their forms,
And draws a kind of quintessence from things:
Which to her proper nature she transforms,
To bear them light on her celestial wings.
Thus does she, when from individual states
She doth abstract the universal kinds;
Which then, re-clothed in divers names and fates,
Steal access through our senses to our minds."
Finally, good sense is the body of poetic genius, fancy its dra-
pery, motion its life, and imagination the soul, that is every
where, and in each; and forms all into one graceful and intelligent
whole.

<page 182>
CHAPTER XV.
The specific symptoms of poetic power elucidated in a critical analysis of Shak-
speare's Venus and Adonis, and Lucrece.
In the application of these principles to purposes of practical
criticism, as employed in the appraisal of works more or less im-
perfect, I have endeavoured to discover what the qualities in a
poem are, which may be deemed promises and specific symptoms
of poetic power, as distinguished from general talent determined to
poetic composition by accidental motives, by an act of the will,
rather than by the inspiration of a genial and productive nature.
In this investigation, I could not, I thought, do better than keep
before me the earliest work of the greatest genius that, perhaps,
human nature has yet produced, our myriad-minded * Shaksnfiaifi.
I mean the "Venus and Adonis," and the "Lucrece;" works
which give at once strong promises of the strength, and yet obvious
proofs of the immaturity of his genius. From these I abstracted
the following marks, as characteristics of original poetic genius in
general.
1. In the "Venus and Adonis," the first and most obvious ex-
cellence, is the perfect sweetness of the versification; its adaptation to the subject; and the power displayed in varying the march of the words without passing into a loftier and more majestic
rhyflinTtnan was demanded by the thoughts, or permitted by Ae
propriety_of preserving a sense of melody predominant. The de-
light in richness and sweetness of sound, even to a faulty excess,
if it be evidently original, and not the result of an easily imitable
mechanism, I regard as a highly favourable promise in the compositions of a young man. "The man that hath not music .in his ^ ^
soul," can, indeed, never be a genuine poet. Imagery (even taken from nature, much more when transplanted from books, as travels, y^tl* *<voyages, and works of natural history) affecting incidents; just °t:^t^}<9
* "Av*]o (AujiovSs, a phrase which I have borrowed from a Greek monk, who applies it to a patriarch of Constantinople. I might have said, that I have re- ■»
claimed, rather than borrowed it; for it seems to belong to Shakspeare, de jure
singular!, et ex privilegio naturse.

<page 183>
182 BIOCRAPHIA LITERARIA.

thoughts; interesting personal or domestic feelings; and with these
the art of their combination or intertexture in the form of a poem;
may all, by incessant effort, be acquired as a trade, by a man of
talents and much reading, who, as I once before observed, has
mistaken an intense desire of poetic reputation for a natural poetic
genius; the love of the arbitrary end for a possession of the pecu-
liar means. But the sense of musical delight, with the power of
Aj^) .producing it, is a gift of imagination; and this, together with the
; "** ',t>ower of reducing multitude into unity of effect, and modifying a
series of thoughts by some one predominant thought or feeling,
■^—■— ■ n■r i.n n ■■ ■ M.,, .- ■. ,■■»»■ .t,.__■.■ .,■.. ■.. m■.■ ■., ■. ■■jjxji■ ...V, _ i■ urn—ju_ u■ ..iQ/ -
naay.be cultivated and imgrovjgd^bjot_can. newerjbejearnt. It is in
these that "Poeta nascitur non fit."
2. A second promise of genius is the choice of subjects very
remote from the private interests and circumstances of the writer
himself. At least I have found, that where the subject is taken
immediately from the author's personal sensations and experiences,
the excellence of a particular poenTIs but an e^uTvocaTmark.and
\ '■■'.■ '*■ ;■ - wen a fallacious pledge, of genuine pbetic_power. Wemay^ per-
- ,,'' yhaps, remember the tale of the statuary, who had acquired con-
1 *-..**'"■siderable reputation for the legs of his goddesses, though the rest
of the statue accorded but indifferently with ideal beauty, till his
wife, elated by her husband's praises, modestly acknowledged, that
she herself had been his constant model. In the Venus and Ado-
nis, this proof of poetic power exists even to excess. It is through-
out as if a superior spirit, more intuitive, more intimately conscious,
even than the characters themselves, not only of every outward
look and act, but of the flux and reflux of the mind in all its subtlest
thoughts and feelings, were placing the whole before our view;
himself, meanwhile, unparticipating in the passions, and actuated
only by that pleasurable excitement, which had resulted from the
energetic fervour of his own spirit, in so vividly exhibiting what it
had so accurately and profoundly contemplated. I think I should
have conjectured from these poems, that even then the great in-
stinct, which impelled the poet to the drama, was secretly working
in him, prompting him by a series and never-broken chain of im-
agery, always vivid, and because unbroken, often minute; by the
highest effort of the picturesque in words, of which words are ca-
pable, higher, perhaps, than was ever realized by any other poet,
even Dante not excepted; to provide a substitute for that visual Ian-
'*A
h

<page 184>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
183

guage, that constant intervention and running comment, by tone,
look and gesture, which in his dramatic works he was entitled to
expect from the players. His " Venus and Adonis" seem at once
the characters themselves, and the whole representation of those characters by the most consummate actors. You seem to be told nothing, but to seejand hear every thing. Hence it is, that from
the perpetual activity of attention required on the part of the reader;
from the rapid flow, the quick change, and the playful nature of the
thoughts and images; and, above all, from the alienation, and^if -g^X? cx4>
I may hazard such an expression, the utter aloofness of theTpoet's / JZT"L4.
own feelings, from those of which he is at once thejpaime£jmd_'*^/''jp\
the analyst; thaTlh^gpTtlieTery subject cannot but detract from the pleasure of a dellcate~mmd7yet never was poem less dangerous
on a moral account. Instead of doing as Ariosto, and as, still
more offensively, Weiland has done; instead of degrading and de-
forming passion into appetite, the trials of love into the struggles of
concupiscence, Shakspeare has here represented the animal im-
pulse itself, so as to preclude all sympathy with it, by dissipating
the reader's notice among the thousand outward images, and now
beautiful, now fanciful circumstances, which form its dresses and
its scenery; or by diverting our attention from the main subject by
those frequent witty or profound reflections, which the poet's ever
active mind has deduced from, or connected with, the imagery and
the incidents. The reader is forced into too much action to sym-
pathize with the merely passive of our nature. As little can a
mind thus roused and awakened be brooded on by mean and indis-
tinct emotion, as the low, lazy mist can creep upon the surface of
a lake, while a strong gale is driving it onward in waves and bil-
lows.
3. It has been before observed, that images, however beautiful,
though faithfully copied from nature, and as accurately represented / J\^*in words, do not of themselves characterize the poet. They be- y Q^ *■come proofs of original genius only, as far as they are modified by f }jy y ',.a predominant passion j_or_by__associated thoughts or images awakened by that passion; or, when they have the effect of reducing
multitude to unity, or succession to an instant; or, lastly, when a
human and intellectual life is transferred to them from the poet's
own spirit,
"Which shoots its being through earth, sea, and air."
#
iL
y*..£,<*f

<page 185>
184
BIOGRAPHIA UTERARIA.
r***
)

In the two following lines, for instance, there is nothing objec-
tionable, nothing which would preclude them from forming, in their
proper place, part of a descriptive poem:
"Behold yon row of pines, that, shorn and bow'd,
Bend from the sea-blast, seen at twilight eve."
But with the small alteration of rhythm, the same words would..
be equally in their place in a book of topography, or in a descrip-
tive tour. The same image will rise into a semblance of poetry if thus conveyed:
"Yon row of bleak and visionary pines,
By twilight-glimpse discerned, mark! how they flee
From the fierce sea-blast, all their tresses wild
Streaming before them."
I have given this as an illustration, by no means as an instance,
of that particular excellence which I had in view, and in which
Shakspeare, even in his earliest, as in his latest works, surpasses
all other poets. It is by this, that he still gives a dignity and a
passion to the objects which he presents. Unaided by any previous excitement, they burst upon us at once in life and in power,
w
""Full many a glorious morning have I seen Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye."
Sjiakspeare's Sonnet 33.
"Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul
Of the wide world dreaming on things to come—
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endur'd,
And the sad augurs mock their own presage;
Incertainties now crown themselves assur'd,
And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
Now with the drops of this most balmy time
My Love looks fresh: and Death to me subscribes!
Since spite of him, I'll live in this poor rhyme,
While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes.
And thou in this shalt find thy monument,
When tyrant's crests, and tombs of brass are spent."
Sonnet 107.
As of higher worth, so doubtless still more characteristic of poet-
ic genius does the imagery become, when it moulds and colours
itself to the circumstances, passion, or character, present and fore- 
<page 186>
BIOGEAPHIA LITERARIA. 185
most in the mind. For unrivalled instances in this excellence, the
reader's own memory will refer him to the Lear, Othello, in
short, to which not of the "great, ever living, dead man's" drama-
tic works? Inopem me copia fecit. How true it is to nature, he
has himself finely expressed in the instance of love, in Sonnet 98.
"From you have I been absent in the spring,
When proud pied April, drest in all its trim,
Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing;
That heavy Saturn laugh'd and leap'd with him.
Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell
Of different flowers in odour and in hue,
Could make me any summer's story tell, Or from their proud lap pluck them, where they grew;
Nor did I wonder at the lilies white,
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose;
They were, tho' sweet, but figures of delight,
Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
Yet seem'd it winter still, and you away,
At wi(h your shadow 1 with these did play '.
Scarcely less sure, or if a less valuable, not less indispensable
mark
■'ogis pijfjia ysvvaiov Xaxoi,
will the image supply, when, with more than the power of the paint-
er, the poet gives us the liveliest image of succession with the feel-
ing of simultaneousness!
With this he breaketh from the sweet embrace
Of those fair arms, that held him to her heart,
And homeward through the dark lawns runs apace:
Look how a bright star shooiethfrom the sky!
So glides he through the night from Venus' eye.
4. The last character I shall mention, which would prove indeed
but little, except as taken conjointly with the former; yet, without
which the former could scarce exist in a high degree, and (even if
this were possible) would give promises only of transitory flashes . .and a meteoric power, is depth, and energy of thought. No f~ &Z?, ~^Z~man was ever yet a great poet, without being at the same time a
profound philosopher. For poetry is the blossom and the fragran-
cy of all human knowledge, human thoughts, human passions, emo-
23

<page 187>
186 B10GRAPUIA LITE11AIUA.
tions, language. In Shakspeare's poems, the creative power, and
the intellectual energy, wrestle as in a war embrace. Each in its
excess of strength seems to threaten the extinction of the other.
At length, in the drama they were reconciled, and fought each with
its shield before the breast of the other. Or, like two rapid streams,
that at their first meeting within narrow and rocky banks, mutually
strive to repel each other, and intermix reluctantly and in tumult;
but soon finding a wider channel and more yielding shores, blend,
and dilate, and flow on in one current and with one voice. The
Venus and Adonis did not, perhaps, allow the display of the deeper
passions. But the story of Lucretia seems to favour, and even
demand their intensest workings. And yet we find in Shakspeare's
management of the tale, neither pathos, nor any other dramatic
quality. There is the same minute and faithful imagery as in the
former poem, in the same vivid colours, inspirited by the same im-
petuous vigour of thought, and diverging and contracting with the
same activity of the assimilative and of the modifying faculties ; and
with a yet larger display, a yet wider range of knowledge and re-
flection; and, lastly, with the same perfect dominion, often domina-
tion, over the whole world of language. What then shall we say 1
even this : that Shakspeare, no mere child of nature; nojiutomaton
of genius; no passive vehicle of inspiration possessed by the spirit,
not possessing it; first studied patiently, meditated deeply, understood minutely, till knowledge, become habitual and intuitive, wed-
ded itself to his habitual feelings, and at length gave birth to that
stupendous powerToy which he stands alone, with no equal or second in his own class; to that power, which seated him on one of
the two glory-smitten summits of the poetic mountain, with Milton
as his compeer, not rival. While the former darts himself forth,
and passes into all the forms of human character and passion, the
**j v ' »/one Proteus of the fire and the flood ; Jhe other attracts all forms
'^LjJ^"and things to himself, into the unity of his own ideal. _A11 things
mi t and modes of action shape themselves anew in the bemg^f Mil-
ton; while Shakspeare becomes all things, yet.foreyer_rejn.ajn-
ing^himself. O what great men hast thou not produced, England!
my country! truly indeed—
Must we be free or die, who speak the tongue
Which Shakspeare spake; the faith and morals hold
Which Milton held. In every thing we are sprung
Of earth's first blood, have titles manifold! Wordsworth.

<page 188>
CHAPTER XVI.
Striking points of difference between the Poets of the present age, and those of
the 15th and 16th centuries—Wish expressed for the union of the characteris-
tic merits of both.
Christendom, from its first settlement on feudal rights, has
been so far one great body, however imperfectly organized, that a
similar spirit will be found in each period to have been acting in all
its members. The study of Shakspeare's poems (I do not include
his dramatic works, eminently as they too deserve that title) led me
to a more careful examination of the contemporary poets both in
this and in other countries. But my attention was especially fixed
on those of Italy, from the birth to the death of Shakspeare; that
being the country in which the fine arts had been most sedulously,
and, hitherto, most successfully cultivated. Abstracted from the
degrees and peculiarities of individual genius, the properties com-
mon to the good writers of each period seem to establish one stri-
king point of difference between the poetry of the fifteenth and six-
teenth centuries, and that of the present age. The remark may,
perhaps, be extended to the sister art of painting. At least, the
latter will serve to illustrate the former. In the present age, the
poet (I would wish to be understood as speaking generally, and
without allusion to individual names) seems to propose to himself
as his main object, and as that which is the most characteristic of
his art, new and striking images, with incidents that interest the
affections or excite the curiosity. Both hi3 characters and his
descriptions he renders, as much as possible, specific and individ-
ual, even to a degree of portraiture. In his diction and metre, on
the other hand, he is comparatively careless. The measure is
either constructed on no previous system, and acknowledges no
justifying principle but that of the writer's convenience; or else
some mechanical movement is adopted, of which one couplet or
stanza is so far an adequate specimen, as that the occasional dif-
ferences appear evidently to arise from accident, or the qualities of
the language itself, not from meditation and an intelligent purpose.
And the language from "Pope's translation of Homer," to "Dar- 

<page 189>
188 BIOGRAPHIA LITEHARIA.
win's Temple of Nature," may, notwithstanding some illustrious
exceptions, be too faithfully characterized, as claiming to be poet-
ical for no better reason than that it would be intolerable in conver-
sation or in prose. Though alas! even our prose writings, nay,
even the stile of our more set discourses, strive to be in the fashion,
and trick themselves out in the soiled and over-worn finery of the
meretricious muse. It is true, that of late a great improvement in
this respect is observable in our most popular writers. But it is
equally true^that this recurrence to plain sense, and genuine mo-
I^JSngJiiSlh, is far from being general; and that the composition
of flir Novels, magazines, public harangues, &c.' is commonly as
trivial in thought, and enigmatic in expression, as if Echo and
Sphinx had laid their heads together to construct it. Nay, even
of those who have most rescued themselves from this contagion, I
should plead inwardly guilty to the charge of duplicity or coward-
ice, if I withheld my conviction, that few have guarded the purity
of their native tongue with that jealous care which the sublime
Dante, in his tract " De la nobile volgare eloquenza," declares to
be the first duty of a poet. For language is the armoury of the
human mind; and at once contains the trophies of its past, and the
weapons of its future conquests. "Animadverte, quam sit ab im-
proprietate verborum pronum hominibus prolabi in errores circa
res!" Hobbes: Exam, et Exmend. hod. Math.—" Sat vero, in
hac vitae brevitate et naturae obscuritate, rerum est, quibus cogno-
scendis tempus impendatur, ut confusis et multivocis sermonibus
intelligendis illud consumere non opus est. Eheu! quantas stra-
ges paravere verba nubila, quae tot dicunt, ut nihil dicunt—nubes
potius, e quibus et in rebus politicis et in ecclesia turbines et tonit-
rua erumpunt! Et proinde recte dictum putamus a Platone in
Gorgia: 'oj <xv to, ovojUxraiiSsi, ijstou xoti to. •xpaypaTU: et ab Epicteto,
aPX1 ."ttifoiijswj '»j ruv ovo|iaruv stfijxs^is: et prudentissime Galenus
scribit, "*j rav ovo(acctwv ^piijij tfapa^Srsisa xai rijv tojv irpay(j,a<ruv srfwa-
parrei yvwjiv. Egregie vero J. C. Scaliger, in Lib. 1. de Flantis:
Est primum, inquit, sapienlis officium, bene sentire, ut sibi vivat:
proximum, bene loqui, ut patriot vivat." Sennertus de Puis:
Differentia.
Something analogous to the materials and structure of modern poetry I seem to have noticed (but here I beg to be understood as
speaking with the utmost diffidence) in our common landscape

<page 190>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 189
painters. Their foregrounds and intermediate distances are com-
paratively unattractive: while the main interest of the landscape is
thrown into the back ground, where mountains and torrents and
castles forbid the eye to proceed, and nothing tempts it to trace its
way back again. But in the works of the great Italian and Flemish
masters, the front and middle objects of the landscape are the most
obvious and determinate, the interest gradually dies away in the
back ground, and the charm and peculiar worth of the picture con-
sists, not so much in the specific objects which it conveys to the
understanding in a visual language formed by the substitution of
figures for words, as in the beauty and harmony of the colours,
lines, and expression, with which the objects are represented.
Hence, novelty of subject was rather avoided than sought for. Su-
perior excellence, in the manner of treating the same subjects, was
the trial and test of the artist's merit.
Not otherwise is it with the more polished poets of the 15th and
16th centuries, especially with those of Italy. The imagery is al-
most always general: sun, moon, flowers, breezes, murmuring
streams, warbling songsters, delicious shades, lovely damsels, cru-
el as fair, nymphs, naiads and goddesses, are the materials which
are common to all, and which each shaped and arranged according
to his judgment or fancy, little solicitous to add or to particularize.
If we make an honourable exception in favour of some English po-
ets, the thoughts too are as little novel as the images; and the fable
of their narrative poems, for the most part drawn from mythology,
or sources of equal notoriety, derive their chief attractions from
their manner of treating them; from impassioned flow, or pictu-
resque arrangement. In opposition to the present age, and per-
haps in as faulty an extreme, they placed the essence of poetry in
the art. The excellence at which they aimed consisted in the ex-
quisite polish of the diction, combined with perfect simplicity. This,
their prime object, they attained by the avoidance of every word
which a gentleman would not use in dignified conversation, and of
every word and phrase, which none but a learned man would use;
by the studied position of words and phrases, so that not only each
part should be melodious in itself, but contribute to the harmony of
the whole, each note referring and conducing to the melody of all
the foregoing and following words of the same period or stanza;
and, lastly, with equal labour, the greater because unbetrayed, by


<page 191>
190 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
the variation and various harmonies of their metrical movement.
Their measures, however, were not indebted for their variety to the
introduction of new metres, such as have been attempted of late in
the "Alonzo and Imogen," and others borrowed from the German,
having in their very mechanism a specific overpowering tune, to
which the generous reader humours his voice and emphasis, with
more indulgence to the author than attention to the meaning or
quantity of the words; but which to an ear familiar with the numer-
ous sounds of the Greek.ajid Roman poets, has an effect not unlike
that of galloping over a paved road in a German stage-wagon with-
out springs. On the contrary, our elder bards, both of Italy and
England, produced a far greater, as well as more charming variety,
by countless modifications, and subtle balances of sound, in the
common metres of their country. A lasting and enviable reputa-
tion awaits the man of genius, who should attempt and realize a
union; who should recall the high finish ; the appropriateness; the
facility; the delicate proportion; and, above all, the perfusive and
omnipresent grace, which have preserved, as in a shrine of precious
amber, the " Sparrow" of Catullus, the "Swallow," the " Grasshop-
per," and all the other little loves of Anacreon: and which with
bright, though diminished glories, revisited the youth and early
manhood of christian Europe, in the vales of Arno,* and the groves
* These thoughts were suggested to me during the perusal of the Madrigals of
Giovambatista Strozzi, published in Florence (nella Stamperia del Sermar-
telli) 1st May, 1593, by his sons Lorenzo and Filippo Strozzi, with a dedication
to their deceased paternal uncle, "Signor Leone Strozzi, Generale delle batta-
ligie di Santa Chiesa." As I do not remember to have seen either the poems or
their author mentioned in any English work, or have found them in any of the
common collections of Italian poetry, and as the little work is of rare occurrence,
I will transcribe a few specimens. I have seldom met with compositions that
possessed, to my feelings, more of that satisfying entireness, that complete ade-
quateness of the manner to the matter which so charms us in Anacreon, joined
with the tenderness, and more than the delicacy of Catullus. Trifles as they are,
they were probably elaborated with great care; yet in the perusal we refer them
to a spontaneous energy rather than to voluntary effort. To a cultivated taste,
there is a delight in perfection for its own sake, independent of the material in
which it is manifested, that none but a cultivated taste can understand or appreciate.
After what I have advanced, it would appear presumption to offer a transla-
tion: even if the attempt was not discouraged by the different genius of the Eng-
lish mind and language, which demands a denser body of thought as the condi-
tion of a high polish, than the Italian. I cannot but deem it likewise an advan-
tage in the Italian tongue, in many other respects inferior to our own, that the
language of poetry is more distinct from that of prose than with us. From the
earlier appearance and established primacy of the Tuscan poets, concurring with
the number of independent states, and the diversity of written dialects, the Ital-
ians have gained a poetic idiom, as the Greeks before them had obtained from
the same causes, with greater and more various discriminations—ex. gr. the
ionic for their heroic verses: the attic for their iambic; and the two modes of the
doric, the lyric or sacerdotal, and the pastoral, the distinctions of which were
doubtless more obvious to the Greeks themselves than they are to us.

<page 192>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 191
of Isis and of Cam ; and who with these should combine the keen-
er interest, deeper pathos, manlier reflection, and the fresher and
more various imagery, which give a value and a name that will not
I will venture to add one other observation before I proceed to the transcrip-
tion. I am aware, that the sentiments which I have avowed concerning the
points of difference between the poetry of the present age, and that of the period
between 1500 and 1650, are the reverse of the opinion commonly entertained. I
was conversing on this subject with a friend, when the servant, a worthy and
sensible woman, coming in, I placed before her two engravings, the one a pinky-
coloured plate of the day, the other a masterly etching by Salvator Rosa, from
one of his own pictures. On pressing her to tell us which she preferred, after a
little blushing and flutter of feeling, she replied—why, that, Sir! to be sure!
(pointing to the ware from the Fleet street print shops,) it's so neat and elegant.
T'other is such a scratchy slovenly thing." An artist, whose writings are scarce-
ly less valuable than his works, and to whose authority more deference will be
willingly paid, than I could even wish should be shown to mine, has told us, and
from his own experience too, that good taste must be acquired, and like all other
food things, is the result of thought, and the submissive study of the best models,
fit be asked—"But what shall I deem such V the answer is: presume these to
be the best, the reputation of which has been matured into fame by the consent
of ages. For wisdom always has a final majority, if not by conviction, yet by
acquiescence. In addition to Sir J. Reynolds, I may mention Harris of Salisbu-
ry, who, in one of his philosophical disquisitions, has written on the means of
acquiring a just taste with the precision of Aristotle, and the elegance of Quin-
tillian.
MADRIGALE.
Gelido suo ruscel chiaro, e tranquillo M'insegno Amor, di state a mezzo'l giorno:Ardean le selve, ardean le piagge, e i colli.
Ood 'io, ch' al piu gran gielo ardo e sfavillo, Subito corsi; ma si puro adorno Girsene il vidi, che turbar no'I volli: '-• _Sol mi specchiava, e'n dolce omhrosa sponda Mi stava intento al mormorar dell' onda.
MADRIGALE.
Aure dell' angoscioso viver mio Refrigerio soave,
E dolce si, che piu non mi par grave
Ne'l arder, ne'l morir, anz' il desio;
Deh voi'l ghiaccio, e le nubi, e'l tempo rio
Discacciatene oinai, che l'onde chiara,
E 1' ombra non men cara
A scherzare, e cantarper suoi boschetti
E prati Festa ed Allegrezza alletti.
MADRIGALE.
Pacifiche, ma spesso in amorosa
Guerra co'fiori, e l'erba
Alia stagione acerba
Verde Insegne del giglio e della rosa
Movete, Aure, pian pian: che tregna o posa,
Se non pace, io ritrovo:
E so ben dove—Oh vago, mansueto

<page 193>
192 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
pass away, to the poets who have done honour to our own times,
and to those of our immediate predecessors.
MADRIGALE.
Sguardo, labbra d'ambrosia, oh rider lieto!
Hor come un Scoglio stassi,
Hor come un Rio se'n fugge
Ed hor crud' Orsa rugge,
Hor canta Angelo pio: ma che non fassi
E che non fammi, O Sassi,
O Rivi, o belve, o Dii, questa mia vaga
Non so, se Ninfa, o Maga, • •.•;-,
Non so, se Donna, o Dea,
Non so, se dolce o rea!
MADRIGAJLE.
Piangendo mi baciaste,
E ridendo il negaste:
Indoglia hebbivi pia,
In festa hebbivi ria:
Nacque Gioia di pianti,
Dolor di riso: O amanti
Miseri, habbiate insieme
Ognor Paura e Speme.
MADRIGALE.
Bel Fior, tu mi rimembri
La rugiadosa guancia del bel viso;
E si vera l'assembri,
Che'n te sovente, come in lei m'affiso:
Ed hor dell vago riso,
Hor dell sereno sguardo
Io pur cieco risguardo. Ma qual fugge,
O Rosa, il mattin lieve 7
E chi te, come neve,
E'1 mio cor teco, e la mia vita strugge. ■
MADRIGALS,
Anna mia, Anna dolce, oh sempre nuovo
E piu chiaro concento,
Quanta dolcezza sento
In sol Anna dicendo 1 Io mi par pruovo,
Ne qui tra noi ritruovo,
Ne tra cieli armonia,
Che del bel nome suo piu dolce sia:
Altro il Cielo, altro Amore,
Altro non suona l'Eco del mio core.
MADRIGALE.
Hor che'l prato, e la selva si scolora,
Al tuo Sereno ombroso

<page 194>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 193
Muovine, alto Riposo!
Deli ch 'io riposi una sol notte, nn hora!
Han le fere, e gli augelli, ognun talora
Ha qualche pace; io quando,
Lasso! non vonne errando,
E non piango, e non grido ? e qual pur forte?
Ma poiche non sente egli, odinc, Morte!
MADRIGALE.
Risi e piansid'Amor; ne pero mai Se non in fiamma, o 'n onda, o 'n vento scrissi;
Spesso merce trovai
Crudel; sempre in me morto, in altri vissi!Hor da' piu scuri abyssi al Ciel m'alzai, Hor ne pur caddi giuso;Stanco al fin qui son chiuso!
24

<page 195>
CHAPTFJt XVII.
Examination of the tenets peculiar to Mr. Wordsworth—Rustic life (above all,
low and rustic life,) especially unfavourable to the formation of a human diction
—The best parts of language the product of philosophers, not clowns or shep-
herdsifToetry essehtialty ideal arid gene'ric^-The language of Milton as much
the language of real life, yea, incomparably more so than that of the cottager.
As far, then, as Mr. Wordsworth in his preface contended, and
most ably contended, for a reformation in our poetic diction, as far
as he has evinced the truth of passion, and the dramatic propriety
of those figures and metaphors in the original poets, which, stript
of their justifying reasons, and converted into mere artifices of con-
nexion or ornament, constitute the characteristic falsity in the po-
etic style of the moderns; and, as far as he has, with equal acute-
ness and clearness, pointed out the process in which this change
was effected, and the resemblances between that state into which
the reader's mind is thrown by the pleasurable confusion of thought,
from an unaccustomed train of words and images; and that state
which is induced by the natural language of empassioned feeling;
he undertook a useful task, and deserves all praise, both for the
attempt, and for the execution. The provocations to this remon-
strance, in behalf of truth and nature, were still of perpetual recur-
rence, before and after the publication of this preface. I cannot,
likewise, but add, that the comparison of such poems of merit, as
have been given to the public within the last ten or twelve years,
with the majority of those produced previously to the appearance
of that preface, leave no doubt on my mind, that Mr. Wordsworth
is fully justified in believing his efforts to have been by no means
ineffectual. Not only in the verses of those who have professed
their admiration of his genius, but even of those who have distin-
guished themselves by hostility to his theory, and depreciation of
his writings, are the impressions of his principles plainly visible. It
is possible, that with these principles others may have been blended,
which are not equally evident; and some which are unsteady and
subvertible from the narrowness or imperfection of their basis. But
it is more than possible, that these errors of defector exaggeration,
by kindling and feeding the controversy, may have conduced, not

<page 196>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 195
tmly to the wider propagation of the accompanying truths, but that,
by their frequent presentation to the mind in an excited state, they
may have won for them a more permanent and practical result. A
man will borrow a part from his opponent, the more easily, if he
feels himself justified in continuing to reject a part. While there
remain important points, in which he can still feel himself in the
right, in which he'still finds firm footing for continued resistance,
he will gradually adopt those opinions which were the least remote
from his own convictions, as not less congruous with his own the-
ory than with that which he reprobates. In like manner, with a
kind of instinctive prudence, he will abandon by little and little his
weakest posts, till at length he seems to forget that they had ever
belonged to him, or affects to consider them, at most, as accidental
and "petty annexments," the removal of which leaves the citadel
unhurt and unendangered.
My own differences, from certain supposed parts of Mr. Words-
worth's theory, ground themselves on the assumption, that his
words had been rightly interpreted, as purporting that the proper
diction for poetry in general consists altogether in a language
taken, with due exceptions, from the mouths of men in real life, a
language which actually constitutes the natural conversation of men
under the influence of natural feelings. My objection is, first, that
in any sense, this rule is applicable only to certain classes of poet-
ry; secondly, that even to these classes it is not applicable, except
in such a sense as hath never, by any one, (as far as I know or
have read,) been denied or doubted; and, lastly, that as far as, and
in that degree in which it is practicable; yet as a rule it is useless,
if not injurious, and therefore, either need not, or ought not to be
practised. The poet informs his reader, that he had generally
chosen low and rustic life; but not as low and rustic, or in order to
repeat that pleasure of doubtful moral effect, which persons of ele-
vated rank and of superior refinement oftentimes derive from a
happy imitation of the rude, unpolished manners, and discourse of
their inferiors. For the pleasure so derived may be traced to three
exciting causes. Thejjrst^jbsjthe_naturalnjess^rijfadtiJlObjBjbings
represented._ The second is the apparent naturalness j)fJh.e_r«pre=
sentation, as raised and qualified by an imperceptible infusion of
the author's own knowledge and talent, which infusion does, indeed,
constitute it an imitation as distinguished .fronyjJSSXSJ°PU' Tb*

<page 197>
196 DIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
third cause may be found in the reader's conscious feeling of his
superiority, awakened by the contrast presented to him; even asj
for the same purpose, the kings and great barons of yore retained,
sometimes, actofJjciowris and fools, but more frequently shrewd
and witty fellows in that character. These, however, were not
Mr. Wordsworth's objects. He chose low and rustic life, " be-
cause in that condition the essential passions of the heart find a
better soil, in which they can attain their maturity, are less under
restraint, and speak a plainer and more emphatic language; be-
cause in that condition of life our elementary feelings co-exist in a
state of greater simplicity, and, consequently, may be more accu-
rately contemplated, and more forcibly communicated ; because the
manners of rural life germinate from those elementary feelings,
and, from the necessary character of rural occupations, are more
easily comprehended, and are more durable; and, lastly, because
in that condition the passions of men are incorporated with the
beautiful and permanent forms of nature."
Now it is clear to me, that in the most interesting of the poems,
in which the author is more or less dramatic, as the "Brothers," "Michael," "Ruth," the "Mad Mother," &c. the persons intro-
duced are by no means taken from low or rustic life, in the com-
mon acceptation of those words; and it is not less clear, that the
sentiments and language, as far as they can be conceived to have
been really transferred from the minds and conversation of such
persons, are attributable to causes and circumstances not necessarily connected with " their occupations and abode." The thoughts,
feelings, language, and manners of the shepherd-farmers in the
vales of Cumberland and Westmoreland, as far as they are actually
adopted in those poems, mayjbe accounted for from causes which
BaUijind do_nroduce the same results in every state of life,jvhether
Jn_towM_oxiicmntry. As the two principal, I rank that indepenp-
ENCE^which raises a man above servitude, or daily toil, for the
profit of others, yet not above the necessity of industry, and a frugal simplicity of domestic life; and the accompanying unambitious,
but solid and religious education, which has rendered few books
familiar but the bible, and the liturgy or hymn book. To this lat-
ter cause, indeed, which is so far accidental, that it is the blessing
of particular countries, and a particular age, not the product of par-
ticular places or employments, the poet owes the show of proba-

<page 198>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERAIUA. 197
bility, that his personages might really feel, think, and talk, with
any tolerable resemblance to his representation. It is an excellent
remark of Dr. Henry More's, (Enthusiasmus triumphatus, sec.
xxxv.) that "a man of confined education, but of good parts, by
constant reading of the bible, will naturally form a more winning
and commanding rhetoric than those that are learned; the inter-
mixture of tonguesand of artificial phrases debasing their style."
It is, moreover, to be considered, that to the formation of healthy
feelings, and a reflecting mind, negations involve impediments, not
less formidable than sophistication and vicious intermixture. I
am convinced, that for the human soul to prosper in rustic lifejjl
certain vantage ground is pre-requisite. It is not every man that
is likely to be improved by a country life, or by country labours.
Education, or original sensibility, or both, must pre-exist, if the
changes, forms, and incidents of nature are to prove a sufficient
stimulant. And where these are not sufficient, the mind contracts
and hardens by want of stimulants; and the man becomes selfish,
sensual, gross, and hard-hearted. Let the management of the
Poor Laws in Liverpool, Manchester, or Bristol, be compared
with the ordinary dispensation of the poor rates in agricultural vil-
lages, where the farmers are the overseers and guardians of the
poor. If my own experience have not been particularly unfortu-
nate, as well as that of the many respectable country clergymen
with whom I have conversed on the subject, the result would en-
gender more than scepticism, concerning the desirable influences
of low and rustic life in and for itself. Whatever may be conclu-
ded on the other side, from the stronger local attachments and en-
terprizing spirit of the Swiss, and other mountaineers, applies to a
particular mode of pastoral life, under forms of property, that per-
mit and beget manners truly republican, not to rustic life in gene-
ral, or to the absence of artificial cultivation. On the contrary, the
mountaineers, whose manners have been so often eulogized, are, in general, better educated, and greater readers than men of equal
rank elsewhere. But where this is not the case, as among the
peasantry of North Wales, the ancient mountains, with_all_Jheir
terrors andji^lj thei^gU)ries. arfejpictures to the blind, and music to
the deaf.
I should not have entered so much into detail upon this passage,
but, here seems to be the point to which all the lines of difference

<page 199>
198 . BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.


converge as to their source and centre. (I mean, as far as, and in
whatever respect, my poetic creed does differ from the doctrines
promulged in this preface.) I adopt, with full faith, the principle
of Aristotle, that poetry, as poetry, is essentially ideal; * that it
ay_oids_auiJ excludes all accident; that its apparent individualities of
rank, character, or occupation, must be representative of a class;
and that the persons of poetry must be clothed with generic attri-
butes, with the common attributes of the class ; not with such as one
gifted individual might possibly possess, but such as from his situ-
ation, it is most probable before-hand, that he would possess. If
my premises are right, and my deductions legitimate, it follows
that there can be no poetic medium between the swains of Theocri-
tus and those of an imaginary golden age.
The characters of the vicar and the shepherd-mariner, in the po-
em of the " Brothers," those of the shepherd of Green-head Gill
in the " Michael," have all the veri-similitude and representative
quality that the purposes of poetry can require. They are persons
of a known and abiding class, and their manners and sentiments
the natural product of circumstances common to the class. Take
"Michael," for instance:
An old man stout of heart, and strong of limb;
His bodily frame had been from youth to age
Of an unusual strength: his mind was keen,
* Say not that I am recommending abstractions; for these class-characteristics,
which constitute the instructiveness of a character, are so modified and particu-
larized in each person of the Shaksperian Drama, that life itself does not excite
more distinctly that sense of individuality which belongs to real existence. Par-
adoxical as it may sound, one of the essential properties of geometry is not less
essential to dramatic excellence; and Aristotle has, accordingly, required of the
Pnlt an IPyp]UltiftP_nf. the universal inj.h_e individual. The chief differences are,
that in geometry, it is the universal truth wnTcli'is uppermost ill the, conscious-
ness; in poetry, the individual form, in which the truth is clothed. With the an-
cients, and not less with the elder dramatists of England and France, both come-
dy and tragedy were considered as kinds of poetry. They neither sought, in
comedy, to make us laugh merrily; much less to make us laugh by wry faces, accidents of jargon, slang phrases for the day, or the clothing of common-place
morals in metaphors drawn from the shops, or mechanic occupations of their
characters. Nor did they condescend, in tragedy, to wheedle away the applause
of the spectators, by representing before them fac-similes of their own mean
selves in all their existing meanness, or to work on their sluggish sympathies by
a pathos not a whit more respectable than the maudlin tears of drunkenness.
Their tragic scenes were meant to affect us indeed; but yet within the bounds of
pleasure, and in union with the activity both of our understanding and imagina-
tion. They wished to transport the mind to a sense of its possible greatness,
and to implant the germs of that greatness, during the temporary oblivion of the
worthless "thing we are," and of the peculiar state in which each man happens
to be, suspending our individual recollections, and lulling them to sleep amid the
music of nobler thoughts.
Friend, Pages 251 and 252.

<page 200>
BIOGUAPIIIA LIT ERA IU A. 199

Intense and frugal, apt for all affairs,
And in his shepherd's calling he was prompt
And watchful more than ordinary men.
Hence, he had learnt the meaning of all winds,
Of blasts of every tone, and oftentimes
When others heeded not, he heard the south
Make subterraneous music, like the noise
Of bagpipers on distant highland hills.
The shepherd, at such warning, of his flock
Bethought him, and he to himself would say,
The winds are now devising work for me!
And truly at all times the storm, that drives
The traveller to a shelter, summon'd him
Up to the mountains. He had been alone
Amid the heart of many thousand mists,
That came to him and left him on the heights.
So liv'd he, till his eightieth year was pass'd.
And grossly that man errs, who should suppose
That the green valleys, and the streams and rocks,
Were things indifferent to the shepherd's thoughts.
Fields, where with cheerful spirits he had breath'd
The common air; the hills which he so oft
Had climb'd with vigorous steps; which had impress'd
So many incidents upon his mind
Of hardship, skill, or courage, joy or fear;
Which, like a book, preserved the memory
Of the dumb animals whom he had sav'd,
Had fed, or shelter'd, linking to such acts,
So grateful in themselves, the certainty
Of honourable gains; these fields, these hills,
Which were his living being, even more
Than his own blood—what could they less?—had laid
Strong hold on his affections—were to him
A pleasurable feeling of blind love,
The pleasure which there is in life itself.
On the other hand, in the poems which are pitched at a lower
note, as the " Harry Gill," "Idiot Boy," &c, the feelings are
those of human nature in general, though the poet has judiciously
laid the scene in the country, in order to place himself in the vicinity
of interesting images, without the necessity of ascribing a senti-
mental perception of their beauty to the persons of his drama. In
the "Idiot Boy," indeed, the mother's character is not so much a
real and native product of a "situation where the essential passions
of the heart find a better soil, in which they can attain their maturi-
ty, and speak a plainer and more emphatic language," as it is an
impersonation of an instinct abandonment by judgment. Hence,
the two following charges seem to me not wholly groundless; at
n

<page 201>
200
MOGRAPH1A LITERARIA.
5**-
■}

«
least, they are the only plausible objections which I have heard to that fine poem. The one is, that the author has not, in the poem
^ itself, taken sufficient care to preclude from the reader's fancy the
* /disgusting images of ordinary, morbid idiocy, which yet it was by
4 / no means his intention to represent. He has even by the "burr,
sj* -f] burr, burr," uncounteracted by any preceding description of the boy's beauty, assisted in recalling them. The other is, that the idiocy of the boy is so evenly balanced by the folly of the mother, as to present to the general reader rather a laughable burlesque on the blindness of anile dotage, than an analytic display of maternal
affeotipn in its ordinary workings. jr
In the " Thorn," the poet himself acknowledges, in a note, the/
'necessity of an introductory poem, in which he should have por-\
-trayed the character of the person from whom the words of the po-
em are supposed to proceed: a superstitious man, moderately ima-
ginative, of slow faculties, and deep feelings; "a captain of a small
trading vessel, for example, who, being past the middle age of life,
had retired upon an annuity, or small independent income, to some
village or country town, of which he was not a native, or in which
he had not been accustomed to live. Such men, having nothing to
do, become credulous and talkative from indolence." But in a
poem, still more in a lyric poem, (and the nurse in Shakspeare's
Romeo and Juliet alone prevents me from extending the remark
even to dramatic poetry, if indeed the Nurse itself can be deemed
altogether a case in point,) it is not possible to imitate truly a
\X^/- ,dull and garrulous discourser, \ti^o\iXxffji^J£^ihSi^&^^JM^'ness and garrulity. However this may be, I dare assert, that the
parts, (and these form the far larger portion of the whole,) which
might as well, or still better, have proceeded from the poet's own
imagination, and have been spoken in his own character, are those
which have given, and which will continue to give, universal delight;
and that the passages exclusively appropriate to the supposed narra-
tor, such as the last couplet of the third stanza ;* the seven last lines
of the tenth;! and the five following stanzas, with the exception of
* "I've measured it from side to side;
'Tis three feet long, and two feet wide."

t" Nay, rack your brain—'tis all in vain,
I'll tell you every thing I knowf ..
But to the Thorn, and to the Pond,
*
r

<page 202>
BIOORAPHIA LITERARIA. 201
the four admirable lines at the commencement of the fourteenth,
are felt by many unprejudiced and unsophisticated hearts, as sud-
Which is a little step beyond,
I wish that you would go:
Perhaps, when you are at the place,
You something of her tale may trace..
I'll give you the best help I can:Before you up the mountain go, Up to the dreary mountain-top, - sI'll tell you all I know. 'Tis now some two-and-twenty years Since she (her name is Martha Ray) ,.
Gave, with a maiden's true good will, Her company to Stephen Hill;And she was blithe and gay, And she was happy, happy still, Whene'er she thought of Stephen Hill.
And they had fix'd the wedding-day,
The morning that must wed them both;But Stephen to another maid
Had sworn another oath;And with this other maid to church
Unthinking Stephen went—
Poor Martha! on that woful day
A pang of pitiless dismay
Into her soul was sent;
-A fire was kindled in her breast,
Which might not burn itself to rest.
They say, full six months after this,
While yet the summer leaves were green,
She to the mountain-top would go,
And there was often seen.
'Tis said a child was in her womb,
As now to any eye was plain;
She was with child, and she was mad;
Yet often she was sober sad
From her exceeding pain.
Oh me! ten thousand times I'd rather
That he had died, that cruel father!
Last Christmas,'when,we talked of this,
Old farmer Simpson did maintain,"
That in her womb the infant wrought
25

<page 203>
202 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.

den and unpleasant sinkings from the height to which the poet
had previously lifted them, and to which he again re-elevates both
himself and his reader.
If then I am compelled to doubt the theory by which the choice
of characters was to be directed, not only a priori, from grounds
of reason, but both from the few instances in which the poet him-
self need be supposed to have been governed by it, and from the
comparative inferiority of those instances; still more must I hesi-
tate in my assent to the sentence which immediately follows the
former citation; and which I can neither admit as particular fact,
or as general rule. "The language, too, of these men is adopted,
(purified, indeed, from what appears to be its real defects, from all
lasting and rational causes of dislike or disgust,) because such
men hourly communicate with the best objects from which the best
part of language is originally derived; and because, from theirrank
in society, and the sameness and narrow circle of their intercourse,
being less under the action of social vanity, they convey their feel-
ings and notions in simple and unelaborated expressions. To this
I reply, that a rustic's language, purified from all provincialism and
grossness, and so far re-constructed as to be made consistent with
the rules of grammar, (which are, in essence, no other than the laws
of universal logic applied to Psychological materials,) will not dif-
fer from the language of any other man of common sense, however
learned or refined he may be, except as far as the notions which
the rustic has to convey are fewer and more indiscriminate. This
will become still clearer if we add the consideration, (equally im-
About its mother's heart, and brought
Her senses back again:
And when at last her time drew near,
Her looks were calm, her senses clear.
No more I know, I wish I did, And I would tell it all to you;For what became of this poor child There's none that ever knew:And if a child was born or no, There's no one that could ever tell;And if 'twas'born alive or dead, There's no one knows, as I have said;But some remember well, That Martha Ray, about this time, Would up the mountain often climb."
'

<page 204>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 203
portant, though less obvious,) that the rustic, from the more imper-
fect development of his faculties, and from the lower state of their
cultivation, aims almost solely to convey insulated facts, either
those of his scanty experience, or his traditional belief; while the
educated man chiefly seeks to discover and express those connec-
tions of things, or those relative bearings of fact to fact, from which
some more or less general law is deducible. For facts are valua-
ble to a wise man, chiefly as they lead to the discovery of the in-
dwelling law, which is the fruejieing of things, the sole solution of
their modes of existence, and in the knowledge of which consists
our dignity and our power.
As little can I agree with the assertion, that from the objects
with which the rustic hourly communicates, the best part of lan-
guage is formed. For, first, if to communicate with an object im-
plies such an acquaintance with it as renders it capable of being
discriminate^ reflected on, the distinct knowledge of an uneduca-
ted rustic would furnish a very scanty vocabulary. The few things
and modes of action, requisite for his bodily conveniences, would
alone be individualized, while all the rest of nature would be ex-
pressed by a small number of confused, general terms. Secondly,
I deny that the words, and combinations of words derived from the
objects with which the rustic is familiar, whether with distinct or
confused knowledge, can be justly said to form the best part of lan-
guage. It is more than probable, that many classes of the brute
creation possess discriminating sounds, by which theycan convey
to each other notices of such objects as concern their food, shelter,
or safety. Yet we hesitate to call the aggregate of such sounds a
language, otherwise than metaphorically. The best part of hu-
man language, properly so called, is derived from reflection on the
acts of the mind itself. It is formed by a voluntary appropriation
of fixed symbols to internal acts, to processes andresults of imagi-
nation, the greater pairoTwh^Iavelio placejn fe consciousness
of uneducated man; though, in civilized society, by imitation and
passive remembrance of what they hear from their religious in- Ql fstructors and other superiors, the most uneducated share in the harvest, which they neither sowed or reaped. If the history of the q^ljk. V:-phrases in hourly currency among our peasants were traced, a per- .-tffc^son not previously aware of the fact would be surprized at finding ,-j^^.i^j,^■so large a number, which, three or four centuries ago, were the ex- -/r^jr^ ~

xf ctcA y*-&

<page 205>
304 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.

elusive property of the universities and the schools; and, at the
commencement of the Reformation, had been transferred from the
school to the pulpit, and thus gradually passed into common life*
The extreme difficulty, and often the impossibility, of finding words
for the simplest moral and intellectual processes in the languages
of uncivilized tribes has proved, perhaps, the weightiest obstacle to
the progress of our most zealous and adroit missionaries. Yet
these tribes are surrounded by the same nature as our peasants
are; but in still more impressive forms; and they are, moreover,
obliged to particularize many more of them. When, therefore, Mr. Wordsworth adds, " accordingly, such a language," (meaning,
as before, the language of rustic life, purified from provincialism,)
"arising out of repeated experience and regular feelings, is a more
permanent, and a far more philosophical language, than that which
is frequently substituteoVfor it by poets, who think they are confer-
ring honour upon themselves and their art, in proportion as they in-
dulge in arbitrary and capricious habits of expression;" it may be
answered, that the language which he has in view can be attributed
to rustics with no greater right than the style of Hooker or Bacon
to Tom Brown or Sir Roger L'Estrange. Doubtless, if what is
peculiar to each were omitted in each, the result must needs be the
same. Further, that the poet, who uses an illogical diction, or a
style fitted to excite only the low and changeable pleasure of won-
der, by means of groundless novelty, substitutes a language of fol-
ly and vanity, not for that of the rustic, but for that of good sense
and natural feeling.
Here let me be permitted to remind the reader, that the posi-
tions, which I controvert, are contained in the sentences—" a se-
lection of the real language of men;"—" the language of these
men, (i. e. men in low and rustic life,) I propose to myself to imitate,
and, as far as possible, to adopt the very language of men." "Be-
tween the language of prose and that oj metrical composition, there
neither is, nor can be, any essential difference." It is against these
exclusively that my opposition is directed.
■ J?\ object, in the very first instance, to an equivocation in the use
f of the word "real." Everyman's language varies according to
the extent of his knowledge, the activity of his faculties, and the
depth or quickness of his feelings. Every man's language has,
first, its individualities; secondly, the common properties of the

<page 206>
B10GRAFHIA LITF.UA HI A. 203
class to which he belongs; and thirdly, words and phrases of trnt-
versal use. The language of Hooker, Bacon, Bishop Taylor, and
Burke, differ from the common language of the learned class only
by the superior number and novelty of the thoughts and relations
which they had to convey. The language of Algernon Sidney
differs not at all from that which every well educated gentleman
would wish to write, and (with due allowances for the undeliberate-
ness, and less connected train of thinking natural and proper to
conversation,) such he would wish to talk. Neither one or the
other differ half as much from the general language of cultivated
society, as the language of Mr. Wordsworth's homliest composi-
tion differs from that of a common peasant. For " real," therefore,
we must substitute QzdJaSX&JuJi*fpui rrnwiim»m'>. And this, we
have proved, is no more to be found in the phraseology of low and
rustic life, than in that of any other class. Omit the peculiarities
of each, and the result, of course, must be common to all. And,
assuredly, the omissions and changes to be made in the language
of rustics, before it could be transferred to any species of poem,
except the drama or other professed imitation, are at least as nu-
merous and weighty as would be required in adapting to the same
purpose the ordinary language of tradesmen and manufacturers.
Not to mention, that the language so highly extolled by Mr. Words-
worth varies in every county, nay, in every village, according to
the accidental character of the clergyman; the existence or non-
existence of schools; or even, perhaps, as the exciseman, publican,
or barber happen to be, or not to be, zealous politicians, and read-
ers of the weekly newspaper pro bono publico. Anterior to culti-
vation, the lingua communis of every country, as Dante has well
observed, exists every where in parts, and no where as a whole.
Neither is the case rendered at all more tenable by the addition
of the words, "in a state oj excitement." For the nature of a
man's words, when he is strongly affected by joy, grief, or anger,
must necessarily depend on the number and quality of the general
truths, conceptions, and images, and of the words expressing them,
with which his mind has been previously stored. For the property
of passion is not to create, but to set in increased activity. At
least, whatever new connections of thought or images, or (which
is equally, if not more than equally, the appropriate effect of strong
excitement) whatever generalizations of truth or experience the


<page 207>
206 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
heat of passion may produce, yet, the terms of their conveyance
must have pre-existed in his former conversations, and are only
collected and crowded together by the unusual stimulation. It is,
indeed, very possible to adopt in a poem the unmeaning repetitions,
habitual phrases, and other blank counters, which an unfurnished
or confused understanding interposes at short intervals, in order to
keep hold of his subject, which is still slipping from him, and to
give him time for recollection; or, in mere aid of vacancy, as in
the scanty companies of a country stage, the same player pops
backwards and forwards, in order to prevent the appearance of
empty spaces in the procession of Macbeth, or Henry Vlllth. But
what assistance to the poet, or ornament to the poem, these can
supply, I am at a loss to conjecture. Nothing, assuredly, can dif-
fer either in origin or in mode more widely from the apparent tau-
tologies of intense and turbulent feeling, in which the passion is
greater, and of longer endurance, than to be exhausted or satisfied
by a single representation of the image or incident exciting it. Such
repetitions I admit to be a beauty of the highest kind, as illustrated
by Mr. Wordsworth himself from the song of Deborah. "At her
feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down; at her feet he bowed, he fell;
where he bowed, there he fell down dead."
■•'.'

<page 208>
CHAPTER XVIII.
Language of metrical composition, why and wherein essentially different from
that of prose—Origin and elements of metre—Its necessary consequences, and
the conditions thereby imposed on the metrical writer in the choice of his
diction.
I conclude, therefore, that the attempt is impracticable; and
that, were it not impracticable, it would still be useless. For the
very power of making the selection implies the previous possession
of the language selected. Or where can the poet have lived?
And by what rules could he direct his choice, which would not have
enabled him to select and arrange his words by the light of his own
judgment? We do not adopt the language of a class by the mere
adoption of such words exclusively, as that class would use, or at
least understand; but, likewise, by following the order in which the
words of such men are wont to succeed each other. Now, this
order, in the intercourse of uneducated men, is distinguished from
the diction of their superiors in knowledge and power, by the great-
er disjunction and separation in the component parts of that, what-
ever it be, which they wish to communicate. There is a want of
that prospectiveness of mind, that surview, which enables a man to
foresee the whole of what he is to convey, appertaining to any one
point; and, by this means, so to subordinate and arrange the dif-
ferent parts according to their relative importance, as to convey it
at once, and as an organized whole.
Now I will take the first stanza on which I have chanced to
open, in the Lyrical Ballads. It is one of the most simple and
the least peculiar in its language.
"In distant countries I have been,
And yet I have not often seen
A healthy man, a man full grown,
Weep in the public road alone.
But such a one, on English ground,
And in the broad highway I met;
Along the broad highway he came,
His cheeks with tears were wet.
Sturdy he seem'd, though he was sad,
And in his arms a lamb he had."

<page 209>
208 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
,*"
The words here are doubtless such as are current in all ranks
of life; and, of course, not less so in the hamlet and cottage, than
in the shop, manufactory, college, or palace. But is this the order
in which the rustic would have placed the words 1 I am grievous-
ly deceived, if the following less compact mode of commencing the
same tale be not a far more faithful copy. "I have been in a many
parts, far and near, and I don't know that I ever saw before, a man
crying by himself in the public road; a grown man I mean, that
was neither sick nor hurt," &c. &c. But when I turn to the fol-
lowing stanza in " The Thorn:"
"At all times of the day and night,
This wretched woman thither goes,
And she is known to every star,
And every wind that blows:
And there beside the thorn she sits,
When the blue day-light's in the skies; And when the whirlwind's on the hill,
Or frosty air is keen and still;And to herself she cries,
Oh misery ! Oh misery! Oh wo is me! Oh misery!"
And compare this with the language of ordinary men; or with that
which I can conceive at all likely to proceed, in real life, from such
a narrator as is supposed in the note to the poem; compare it either
in the succession of the images or of the sentences, I am reminded
of the sublime prayer and hymn of praise, which Milton, in oppo-
sition to an established liturgy, presents as a fair specimen of com-
mon extemporary devotion, and such as we might expect to hear
from every self-inspired minister of a conventicle! And I reflect
with delight, how little a mere theory, though of his own workman-
ship, interferes with the processes of genuine imagination in a man
- of true poetic genius, who possesses, as Mr. Wordsworth, if ever
man did, most assuredly does possess,
"The Vision and the Faculty divine."
One point, then, alone remains, but that the most important; its
examination having been, indeed, my chief inducement for the pre-
ceding inquisition. "There'neither is, nor can be, any essential dif-
ference between the language of prose and metrical composition."
Such is Mr. Wordsworth's assertion. Now, prose itself, at least, in

<page 210>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 209
all argumentative and consecutive works, differs, and ought to dif-
fer, from the language of conversation; even as reading ought to
differ from talking.* Unless, therefore, the difference denied be
that of the mere words, as materials common to all styles of writing,
and not of the style itself, in the universally admitted sense of the
term, it might be naturally presumed that there must exist a still
greater between the ordonnance of poetic composition and that of
prose, than is expected to distinguish prose from ordinary conver-
sation.
There are not, indeed, examples wanting in the history of litera-
ture, of apparent paradoxes that have summoned the public won-
der, as new and startling truths, but which, on examination, have
shrunk into tame and harmless truisms; as the eyes of a cat, seen
in the dark, have been mistaken for flames of fire. But Mr.
Wordsworth is among the last men, to whom a delusion of this
kind would be attributed by any one who had enjoyed the slightest
opportunity of understanding his mind and character. Where an
objection has been anticipated by such an author as natural, his
answer to it must needs be interpreted in some sense, which either
is, or has been, or is capable of being, controverted. My object
then, must be to discover some other meaning for the term "essen-
tial difference" in this place, exclusive of the indistinction and com-
munity of the words themselves. For whether there ought to exist
a class of words in the English, in any degree resembling the poetic
* It is no less an error in teachers, than a torment to the poor children, to en-
force the necessity of reading as they would talk. In order to cure them of sing-
ing, as it is called, that is, of too great a difference, the child is made to repeat
the words with his eyes from off the book; and then, indeed, his tones resemble
talking, as far as his fears, tears, and trembling will permit. But, as soon as the
eye is again directed to the printed page, the spell begins anew; for an instinctive
sense tells the child's feelings, that to utter its own momentary thoughts, and to
recite the written thoughts of another, as of another, and a far wiser than him-
self, are two widely different things; and, as the two acts are accompanied with
widely different feelings, so must they justify different modes of enunciation.
Joseph Lancaster, among his other sophistications of the excellent Dr. Bell's in-
valuable system, cures this fault of singing-, by hanging fetters and chains on the
child, to the music of which one of his school fellows, who walks before, dolefully
chaunts out the child's last speech and confession, birth, parentage, and educa-
tion. And this soul-benumbing ignominy, this unholy and heart-hardening bur-
lesque on the last fearful infliction of outraged law, in pronouncing the sentence
to whictuthe stern and familiarized judge not seldom bursts into tears, has been
extolled as a happy and ingenious method of remedying—what 1 and how ?—why,
one extreme in order to introduce another, scarce less distant from good sense,
and certainly likely to have worse moral effects, by enforcing a semblance of
petulant ease and self-sufficiency, in repression, and possible after-perversion of
the natural feelings. I have to beg Dr. Bell's pardon for this connexion of the
two names, but he knows that contrast is no less powerful a cause of association
than likeness.
26

<page 211>
210 BIOGRAPHIA L1TERARIA.
dialect of the Greek and Italian, is a question of very subordinate
importance. The number of such words would be small indeed,
in our language, and even in the Italian and Greek; they consist
not so much of different words, as of slight differences in the forms
of declining and conjugating the same words; forms, doubtless,
which having been, at some period more or less remote, the com-
mon grammatic flexions of some tribe or province, had been acci-
dentally appropriated to poetry by the general admiration of certain
master intellects, the first established lights of inspiration, to whom
that dialect happened to be native.
Essence, in its primary signification, means the principle of »»-
dividuation, the inmost principle of the possibility of any thing, as
that particular thing. It is equivalent to the idea of a thing, when-
ever we use the word idea with philosophic precision. Existence,
on the other hand, is distinguished from essence, by the superin-
duction of reality. Thus we speak of the essence, and essential
properties of a circle; but we do not therefore assert, that any thing
which really exists is mathematically circular. Thus, too, without
any tautology, we contend for the existence of the Supreme Being;
that is, for a reality corresponding to the idea. There is, next, a
secondary use of the word essence, in which it signifies the point or
ground of contra-distinction between two modifications of the same
substance or subject. Thus we should be allowed to say, that the
style of architecture of Westminister Abbey is essentially different
from that of Saint Paul, even though both had been built with blocks
cut into the same form, and from the same quarry. Only in this
latter sense of the term must it have been denied by Mr. Words-
worth (for in this sense alone is it affirmed by the general opinion)
that the language of poetry (i. e. the formal construction, or archi-
tecture of the words and phrases) is essentially different from that
of prose. Now the burthen of the proof lies with the oppugner,
not with the supporters of the common belief. Mr. Wordsworth,
in consequence, assigns, as the proof of his position, " that not on-
ly the language of a large portion of every good poem, even of the
most elevated character, must necessarily, except with reference to
the metre, in no respect differ from that of good prose ; but likewise
that some of the most interesting parts of the best poems will be
strictly the language of prose, when prose is well written. The
truth of this assertion might be demonstrated by innumerable

<page 212>
BIOGRAPHIA L1TERARIA. 211
passages from almost all the poetical writings even of Milton him-
self." He then quotes Gray's sonnet—
"In vain to me the smiling mornings shine,
And reddening Phoebus lifts his golden fire;
The birds in vain their amorous descant join,
Or cheerful fields resume their green attire;
These ears, alas ! for other notes repine;
A different object do these eyes require;
My lonely anguish melts no heart but mine,
And in my breast the imperfect joys expire J
Yet morning smiles, the busy race to cheer,
And new-born pleasure brings to happier men:
The fields to all their wonted tributes bear,
To warm their little loves the birds complain.
I fruitless mourn to him that cannot hear.
And weep the more, because I weep in vain."
and adds the following remark:—" It will easily be perceived, that
the only part of this Sonnet which is of any value, is the lines print-
ed in italics. It is equally obvious, that except in the rhyme, and in
the use of the single word " fruitless" for fruitlessly, which is so far
a defect, the language of these lines does in no respect differ from
that of prose."
An idealist defending his system by the^fact, that when asleep we
often believe ourselves awake, was well answered by his plain
neighbour, "Ah, but when awake do we ever believe ourselves
asleep 1" , Things identical must be convertible. The preceding
passage seems to rest on a similar sophism. For the question is
not, whether there may not occur in prose an order of words, which
would be equally proper in a poem; nor whether there are not
beautiful lines and sentences of frequent occurrence in good po-
ems, which would be equally becoming, as well as beautiful, in
good prose; for neither the one or the other has ever been either
denied or doubted by any one. The true question must be, wheth-
er there are not modes of expression, a construction, and an order
of sentences, which are in their fit and natural place in a serious
prose composition, but would be disproportionate and heterogene-
ous in metrical poetry; and, vice versa, whether in the language of
a serious poem there may not be an arrangement both of words
and sentences, and a use and selection of (what are called) figures
of speech, both as to their kind, their frequency, and their occasions,
which, on a subjeet of equal weight, would be vicious and alien in

<page 213>
212 BIOGRAPHI A LITERARIA.
correct and manly prose. I contend, that in both cases, this unfit-
ness of each for the place of the other frequently will and ought to
exist.
And, first, from the origin of metre. This I would trace to the
balance in the mind effected by that spontaneous effort which strives
to hold in check the workings of passion. It might be easily ex-
plained, likewise, in what manner this salutary antagonism is assist-
ed by the very state which it counteracts, and how this balance of
antagonists became organized into metre, (in the usual acceptation
of that term,) by a supervening act of the will and judgment, con-
sciously, and for the foreseen purpose of pleasure. Assuming
these principles as the data of our argument, we deduce from them
two legitimate conditions, which the critic is entitled to expect in
every metrical work. First: that as the elements of metre owe their
existence to a state of increased excitement, so the metre itself
should be accompanied by the natural language of excitement.
Secondly: that as these elements are formed into metre artificially,
by a voluntary act, with the design, and for the purpose of blending
delight with emotion, so the traces of present violtion should,
throughout the metrical language, be proportionally discernible.
Now, these two conditions must be reconciled and co-present.
There must be, not only a partnership, but a union; an interpene-
tration of passion and will, of spontaneous impulse and of voluntary
purpose. Again: this union can be manifested only in a frequency
of forms and figures of speech, (originally the offspring of passion,
but now the adopted children of power,) greater than would be de-
sired or endured where the emotion is not voluntarily encouraged,
and kept up for ihe sake of that pleasure which such emotion, so
tempered and mastered by the will, is found capable of communi-
cating. It not only dictates, but of itself tends to produce a more
frequent employment of picturesque and vivifying language, than
would be natural in any other case in which there did not exist, as
there does in the present, a previous and well understood, though
tacit, compact between the poet and his reader, that the latter is
entitled to expect, and the former bound to supply this species and
degree of pleasurable excitement. We may, in some measure,
apply to this union, the answer of Polixenes, in the Winter's Tale,
to Perdita's neglect of the streaked gilly-flowers, because she
had heard it said,

<page 214>
BlOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 213
"There is an art which in their piedness shares
"With great creating nature.
Pol. Say there be:
"Yet nature is made better by no mean,
"But nature makes that mean. So ev'n that art,
"Which you say adds to nature, is an art
"That nature makes! You see, sweet maid, we marry
"A gentler scyon to the wildest stock:
"And make conceive a bark of ruder kind
"By bud of nobler race. This is an art,
"Which does mend nature—change it rather; but
"The art itself is nature."
Secondly, I argue from the effects of metre. As far as metre
acts in and for itself, it tends to increase the vivacity and suscepti-
bility both of the general feelings and of the attention. This effect
it produces by the continued excitement of surprise, and by the
quick reciprocations of curiosity, still gratified and still re-excited,
which are too slight, indeed, to be at any one moment objects of
distinct consciousness, yet become considerable in their aggregate
influence. As a medicated atmosphere, or as wine, during ani-
mated conversation, they act powerfully, though themselves unno-
ticed. Where, therefore, correspondent food and appropriate mat-
ter are not provided for the attention and feelings, thus roused,
there must needs be a disappointment felt; like that of leaping in
the dark from the last step of a stair-case, when we had prepared
our muscles for a leap of three or four.
The discussion on the powers of metre in the preface is highly
ingenious, and touches at all points on truth. But I cannot find
any statement of its powers considered abstractly and separately.
On the contrary, Mr. Wordsworth seems always to estimate metre
by the powers which it exerts during (and, as I think, in consequence
of) its combination with other elements of poetry. Thus, the pre-
vious difficulty is left unanswered, what the elements are with which
it must be combined, in order to produce its own effects to any
pleasurable purpose. Double and trisyllable rhymes, indeed, form
a lower species of wit, and attended to, exclusively for their own
sake, may become a source of momentary amusement; as in poor
Smart's distich to the Welch 'Squire, who had promised him a hare:
"Tell me, thou son of great Cadwallader!Hast sent the hare, or hast thou swallow'd her 1

<page 215>
214 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
But, for any poetic purposes, metre resembles (if the aptness of
the simile may excuse its meanness) vest, worthless or disagreea-
ble by itself, but giving vivacity and spirit to the liquor with which
it is proportionally combined.
The reference to the " Children of the Wood," by no means
satisfies my judgment. We all willingly throw ourselves back for
a while into the feelings of our childhood. This ballad, therefore,
we read under such recollections of our own childish feelings, as
would equally endear to us poems which Mr. Wordsworth himself
would regard as faulty in the opposite extreme of gaudy and tech-
nical ornament. Before the invention of printing, and in a still
greater degree before the introduction of writing, metre, especially
alliterative metre, (whether alliterative at the beginning of the
words, as in " Pierce Plouman," or at the end, as in rhymes,) pos-
sessed an independent value, as assisting the recollection, and, con-
sequently, the preservation of any series of truths or incidents.
But I am not convinced by the collation of facts, that the " Chil-
dren in the Wood" owes either its preservation or its popularity to
its metrical form. Mr. Marshal's repository affords a number of
tales in prose inferior in pathos and general merit, some of as old
a date, and many as widely popular. Tom Hickathrift, Jack
the Giant-killer, Goody Two-shoes, and Little Red Ri-
ding-hood, are formidable rivals. And that they have continued
in prose, cannot be fairly explained by the assumption, that the
comparative meanness of their thoughts and images precluded even
the humblest forms of metre. The scene of Goody Two-shoes
in the church is perfectly susceptible of metrical narration; and
among the Qaiiutru Sau|xasoTara, even of the present age, I do not
recollect a more astonishing image than that of the "whole rookery,
that flew out of the giant's beard," scared by the tremendous voice
with which this monster answered the challenge of the heroic Tom
HlCKATHRIFT!
If from these we turn to compositions, universally, and independ-
ently of all early associations, beloved and admired, would the Ma-
ria, The Monk, or The Poor Man's Ass of Sterne, be read
with more delight, or have a better chance of immortality, had they,
without any change in the diction, been composed in rhyme, than
in the present state? If I am not grossly mistaken, the general
reply would be in the negative. Nay, I will confess, that in Mr.

<page 216>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 215
Wordsworth's own volumes, the Anecdote for Fathers, Simon
Lee, Alice Fell, The Beggars, and The Sailor's Mother,
notwithstanding the beauties which are to be found in each of
them, where the poet interposes the music of his own thoughts,
would have been more delightful to me in prose, told and managed,
as by Mr. Wordsworth they would have been, in a moral essay, or
pedestrian tour.
Metre in itself is simply a stimulant of the attention, and there-
fore excites the question—Why is the attention to be thus stimu-
lated ] Now the question cannot be answered by the pleasure of
the metre itself; for this we have shown to be conditional, and de-
pendent on the appropriateness of the thoughts and expressions, to
which the metrical form is superadded. Neither can I conceive
any other answer that can be rationally given, short of this: I
write in metre, because I am about to use a language different
from that of prose. Besides, where the language is not such, how
interesting soever the reflections are that are capable of being
drawn by a philosophic mind from the thoughts or incidents of the
poem, the metre itself must often become feeble. Take the three
last stanzas of the Sailor's Mother, for instance. If I could for
a moment abstract from the effect produced on the author's feel-
ings, as a man, by the incident at the time of its real occurrence, I
would dare appeal to his own judgment, whether in the metre itself
he found a sufficient reason for their being written metrically?
"And thus continuing, she said,
I had a son, who many a day
Sailed on the seas; but he is dead;
In Denmark he was cast away:
And I have travelled far as Hull, to see
What clothes he might have left, or other property.
The bird and cage, they both were his;
'Twas my son's bird; and neat and trim
He kept it; many voyages
This singing bird hath gone with him:
When last he sailed he left the bird behind;
As it might be, perhaps, from bodings of his mind.
He to a fellow-lodger's care
Had left it, to be watched and fed, j
Till he came back again; and there
I found it when my son was dead;
And now, God help me for my little wit!
I trail it with me, Sir! he took so much delight in it."

<page 217>
216 BIOGRAPHI A LITERARIA.
If disproportioning the emphasis we read these stanzas so as to
make the rhymes perceptible, even trisyllable rhymes could scarce-
ly produce an equal sense of oddity and strangeness, as we feel
here in finding rhymes at all in sentences so exclusively colloquial.
I would further ask whether, but for that visionary state, into which
the figure of the woman and the susceptibility of his own genius
had placed the poet's imagination, (a state, which spreads its influ-
ence and colouring over all that co-exists with the exciting cause,
and in which
"The simplest, and the most familiar things
Gain a strange power of spreading awe around them;" *)
I would ask the poet whether he would not have felt an abrupt
downfall in these verses from the preceding stanza?
"The ancient spirit is not dead;
Old times, thought I, are breathing there!
Proud was I, that my country bred
Such strength, a dignity so fair! She begged an alms, like one in poor estate;
I looked at her again, nor did my pride abate."
It must not be omitted, and is, besides, worthy of noticerihat
those stanzas furnish the only fair instance that I have been able
to discover in all Mr. Wordsworth's writings, of an actual adop-
tion, or true imitation, of the real and very language of low and
rustic life, freed from provincialisms.
Thirdly, 1 deduce the position from all the causes elsewhere as-
signed, which render metre the proper form of poetry, and poetry
imperfect and defective without metre. Metre, therefore, having
been connected with poetry most often and by a peculiar fitness,
whatever else is combined with metre must, though it be not itself
essentially poetic, have nevertheless some property in common
* Altered from the description of Night-Mare in the Remorse:
"Oh Heaven! 'twas frightful! Now run down and stared at
By hidious shapes that cannot be remembered;
Now seeing nothing, and imaging nothing;
But only being afraid—stifled with fear!
While every goodly or familar form
Had a strange power of spreading terror round me:"
N. B. Though Shakspeare has, for his own all-justifying purposes, introduced
the Night-Mare with her own foals, yet Mair means a Sister, or perhaps a Hag.

<page 218>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
217
with poetry, as an intermedium of affinity, a sort (if I may dare bor-
row a well-known phrase from technical chemistry) of mordaunt between it and the superadded metre. Now, poetry, Mr. Words-
worth truly affirms, does always imply passion, which word must
be here understood in its most general sense, as an excited state
of the feelings and faculties. And as every passiorrhas its proper
pulse, so will it likewise have its characteristic modes of expression. But where there exists that degree of genius and talent
which entitles a writer to aim at the honours of a poet, the very act
of poetic composition itself is, and is allowed to imply and to produce, an unusual state of excitement, which, of course, justifies and
demands a correspondent difference of language, as truly, though
not perhaps in as marked a degree, as the excitement of love, fear,
rage, or jealousy. The vividness of the descriptions or declama-
tions in Donne, or Dryden, is as much and as often derived from
the force and fervour of the describer, as from the reflections,
forms, or incidents, which constitute their subject and materials. The wheels take fire from the mere rapidity of their motion. To
what extent, and under what modifications, this may be admitted
to act, I shall attempt to define in an after remark on Mr. Words-
worth's reply to this objection, or rather on his objection to this re-
ply, as already anticipated in his preface.
Fourthly, and as intimately connected with this, if not the same
argument in a more general form, I adduce the high spiritual in-
stinct of the human being, impelling us to seek unity by harmo-
nious adjustment, and thus establishing the principle, that all the
parts of an organized whole must be assimilated to the more important and essential parts. This and the preceding arguments
may be strengthened by the reflection, that the compositiori>'of a
poem is among the imitative arts, and that imitation, as opposed to
copying, consists either in the interfusion of the same, throughout
the radically different, or of the different throughout a base radically the same.
Lastly, I appeal to the practice of the best poets of all countries
and in all ages, as authorizing the opinion, (deduced from all the
foregoing,) that in every import of the word essential, which
would not here involve a mere truism, there may be, is, and ought
to be, an essential difference between the language of prose and of
metrical composition.
27

<page 219>
218 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
In Mr. Wordsworth's criticism of Gray's Sonnet, the reader's
sympathy with his praise or blame of the different parts is taken
for granted, rather perhaps too easily. He has not, at least, at-
tempted to win or compel it by argumentative analysis. In my
conception, at least, the lines rejected, as of no value, do, with the
exception of the two first, differ as much and as little from the lan-
guage of common life, as those which he has printed in italics, as
possessing genuine excellence. Of the five lines thus honourably
distinguished, two of them differ from prose even more widely than
the lines which either precede or follow, in the position of the words:
"A different object do these eyes require;
My lonely anguish melts no heart but mine;
And in my breast the imperfect joys expire."
But were it otherwise, what would this prove, but a truth, of
which no man ever doubted? videlicet, that there are sentences
which would be equally in their place, both in verse and prose.
Assuredly it does not prove the point, which alone requires proof,
namely, that there are not passages which would suit the one, and
not suit the other. The first line of this sonnet is distinguished
from the ordinary language of men by the epithet to morning. (For
we will set aside, at present, the consideration that the particular
word "smiling1' is hackneyed, and, (as it involves a sort of per-
sonification,) not quite congruous with the common and material
attribute of shining.) And, doubtless, this adjunction of epithets,
for the purpose of additional description, where no particular atten-
tion is demanded for the quality of the thing, would be noticed as
giving a poetic cast to a man's conversation. Should the sports-
man exclaim, "come, boys! the rosy morning calls you up," he will
be supposed to have some song in his head. But no one suspects
this, when he says, "a wet morning shall not confine us to our
beds." This, then, is either a defect in poetry, or it is not. Who-
ever should decide in the affirmative, I would request him to re-
peruse any one poem, of any confessedly great poet, from Homer
to Milton, or from Eschylus to Shakspeare, and to strike out (in
thought I mean) every instance of this kind. If the number of
these fancied erasures did not startle him, or if he continued to
deem the work improved by their total omission, he must advance
reasons of no ordinary strength and evidence—reasons grounded

<page 220>
BIOGRAFHIA LITERARIA. 219
ia the essence of human nature; otherwise I should not hesitate to
consider him as a man not so much proof against all authority, as
dead to it. The second line,
"And reddening Phoebus lifts his golden fire;"
has indeed almost as many faults as words. But then it is a bad
line, not because the language is distinct from that of prose, but
because it conveys incongruous images; because it confounds the
cause and the effect, the real thing with the personified representa-
tive of the thing; in short, because it differs from the language of
good sense! That the " Phoebus" is hacknied, and a school-boy
image, is an accidental fault, dependent on the age in which the
author wrote, and not deduced from the nature of the thing. That
it is part of an exploded mythology, is an objection more deeply
grounded. Yet when the torch of ancient learning was re-kindled,
so cheering were its beams, that our eldest poets, cut off by Chris-
tianity from all accredited machinery, and deprived of all acknow-
ledged guardians and symbols of the great objects of nature, were
naturally induced to adopt, as a poetic language, those fabulous personages, those forms of the supernatural in nature,* which had
given them such dear delight in the poems of their great masters.
Nay, even at this day, what scholar of genial taste will not so far
sympathise with them, as to read with pleasure in Petrarch, Chau-
cer, or Spenser, what he would perhaps condemn as puerile in a
modern poet?
I remember no poet whose writings would safelier stand the test
of Mr. Wordsworth's theory, than Spenser. Yet will Mr. Words-
worth say, that the style of the following stanzas is either undistin-
guished from prose, and the language of ordinary life, or, that it is
vicious, and that the stanzas are blots in the Faery Queen?
"By this the northern waggoner had set
His sevenfod teme behind the steadfast starre,
That was in ocean waves yet never wet,
But firm is fixt and sendeth light from farre
To all that in the wild deep wandering are.
And cheerful chanticleer with his note shrill
Had warned once that Phcebus's fiery carre
* But still more by the mechanical system of philosophy which has needlessly
infected our theological opinions; and teaching us to consider the world in its
relation to God, as of a building to its mason, leaves the idea of omnipresence a
mere abstract notion in the state-room of our reason.'

<page 221>
220 BIOGRAPHIA I.ITERARIA.
In haste was climbing up the eastern hill,
Full envious that night so long his room did fill."
Book i. Cam. 2. St. 2.
"At last the golden orientall gate
Of greatest heaven gan to open fayre,
And Phoebus fresh as brydegrome to his mate,
Came dauncing forth, shaking his deawie hayre,
And hurl'd his glist'ring beams through gloomy ayre;
Which when the wakeful elfe perceived, streightway
He started up, and did him selfe prepayre
In sun-bright armes, and battailous array;
For with that pagan proud he combat will that day."
&. i. Can. 5. St. 2.
On the contrary, to how many passages, both in hymn books
and in blank verse poems, could I (were it not invidious) direct the
reader's attention, the style of which is most unpoetic, because, and
only because, it is the style of prose? He will not suppose me
capable of having in my mind such verses, as
"I put my hat upon my head,
And walk'd into the strand;
And there I met another man,
Whose hat was in his hand."
To such specimens it would indeed be a fair and full reply, that
these lines are not bad, because they are unpoetic; but because
they are empty of all sense and feeling, and that it were an idle at-
tempt to prove that an ape is not a Newton, when it is evident that
he is not a man. But the sense shall be good and weighty, the
language correct and dignified, the subject interesting, and treated
with feeling; and yet the style shall, notwithstanding all these
merits, be justly blamable as prosaic, and solely because the words
and the order of the words would find their appropriate place in
prose, but are not suitable to metrical composition. The "Civil
Wars" of Daniel, is an instructive, and even interesting work; but
take the following stanzas, (and from the hundred instances which
abound, I might probably have selected others far more striking:)
"And to the end we may with better ease
Discern the true discourse, vouchsafe to show
What were the times foregoing near to these,
That these we may with better profit know.
Tell how the world fell into this disease;
And how so great distemperature did grow;

<page 222>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 221
So shall we see with what degrees it came;
How things at full do soon wax out of frame."
"Ten kings had from the Norman conqu'ror reign'd
With intermixt and variable fate,
When England to her greatest height attain'd
Of power, dominion, glory, wealth, and state;
After it had with much ado sustain'd
The violence of princes with debate
For titles, and the often mutinies
Of nobles for their ancient liberties."
"For first the Norman, conqu'ring all by might,
By might was forced to keep what he had got;
Mixing our customs and the form of right
With foreign constitutions, he had brought;
Mastering the mighty, humbling the poorer wight,
By all severest means that could be wrought;
And making the succession doubtful, rent
His new-got state, and left it turbulent."
B. i. St. vii. viii. and ix.
Will it be contended, on the one side, that these lines are mean
and senseless? Or on the other, that they are not prosaic, and for
that reason unpoetic 1 This poet's well-merited epithet is that of
the "well-languaged Daniel;" but likewise, and by the consent of
his contemporaries no less than of all succeeding critics, the " pro-
saic Daniel." Yet those, who thus designate this wise and amia-
ble writer, from the frequent incorrespondency of his diction to his
metre in the majority of his compositions, not only deem them val-
uable and interesting on other accounts, but willingly admit, that
there are to be found throughout his poems, and especially in his
Epistles, and in his Hymen's Triumph, many and exquisite speci-
mens of that style which, as the neutral ground of prose and verse,
is common to both. A fine, and almost faultless extract, eminent
as for other beauties, so for its perfection in this species of diction,
may be seen in Lamb's Dramatic Specimens, &c. a work of vari-
ous interests from the nature of the selections themselves, (all from
the plays of Shakspeare's contemporaries,) and deriving a high ad-
ditional value from the notes, which are full of just and original
criticism, expressed with all the freshness of originality.
Among the possible effects of practical adherence to a theory,
that aims to identify the style of prose and verse, (if it does, indeed,
claim for the latter a yet nearer resemblance to the average style

<page 223>
222 B10GRAPHU LITERAUIA.
of men in the viva voce intercourse of real life,) we might anti-
cipate the following, as not the least likely to occur. It will hap-
pen, as I have indeed before observed, that the metre itself, the
sole acknowledged difference, will occasionally become metre to
the eye only. The existence of prosaisms, and that they detract
from the merit of a poem, must at length be conceded, when a num-
ber of successive lines can be rendered, even to the most delicate
ear, unrecognizable as verse, or as having even been intended for
verse, by simply transcribing them as prose; when, if the poem be
in blank verse, this can be effected without any alteration, or at
most by merely restoring one or two words to their proper places,
from which they had been transplanted * for no assignable cause
or reason, but that of the author's convenience; but if it be in
rhyme, by the mere exchange of the final word of each line for
some other of the same meaning, equally appropriate, dignified and
euphonic. .. .±
The answer or objection in the preface to the anticipated remark,
"that metre paves the way to other distinctions," is contained in
the following words: "The distinction of rhyme and metre is vol-
untary and uniform, and not like that produced by (what is called)
poetic diction, arbitrary, and subject to infinite caprices, upon which
•*■**% '•
♦As the ingenious gentleman, under the influence of the Tragic Muse, con-
trived to dislocate, "I wish you a good morning, Sir! Thank you, Sir, and I
wish you the same," into two blank verse heroics:
To you a morning good, good Sir! I wish.
You, Sir! I thank: to you the same wish I. -
In those parts of Mr. Wordsworth's works, which I have thoroughly studied,
I find fewer instances in which this would be practicable than I have met in ma-
ny poems, where an approximation of prose has been sedulously, and on system,
guarded against. Indeed, excepting the stanzas already quoted from the Sailor1*
Mother, I can recollect but one instance, viz : a short passage of four or five lines
in The Brothers, that model of English pastoral, which I never yet read with
unclouded eye.—"James, pointing to its summit, over which they had all pur-
posed to return together, informed them that he would wait for. them there.
They parted, and his comrades passed that way some two hours after, but they
did not find him at the appointed place, a circumstance of which they iopk no heed;
but one of them going by chance into the house, which at this time was James's
house, learnt there that nobody had seen him all that day." The only change
which has been made is in the position of the little word there in two instances,
the position in the original being clearly such as is not adopted in ordinary con-
versation. The other words printed in italics, were so marked because, though
good and genuine English, they are not the phraseology of common conversa-
tion, either in the word put in apposition, or in the connection by the genitive
pronoun. Men in general would have said, "but that was a circumstance they
paid no attention to, or took no notice of," and the language is, on the theory of
the preface, justified only by the narrator's being the Vicar. Yet if any ear
could suspect, that these sentences were ever printed as metre, on those very
words alone could the suspicion have been grounded.

<page 224>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARU. 223
no calculation whatever can be made. In the one case, the reader
is utterly at the mercy of the poet respecting what imagery or dic-
tion he may choose to connect with the passion." But is this a
poet, of whom a poet is speaking? No, surely! rather of a fool or
madman; or, at best, of a vain or ignorant phantast! And might
not brains so wild and so deficient make just the same havoc with
rhymes and metres, as they are supposed to effect with modes and
figures of speech? How is the reader at the mercy of such men?
If he continue to read their nonsense, is it not his own fault? The
ultimate end of criticism is much more to establish the principles of
writing, than to furnish rules how to pass judgment on what has
been written by others; if indeed it were possible that the two could
be separated. But if it be asked, by what principles the poet is to
regulate his own style, if he do not adhere closely to the sort and
order of words which he hears in the market, wake, high-road, or
plough-field? I reply: by principles, the ignorance or neglect of
which would convict him of being no poet, but a silly or presump-
tuous usurper of the name! By the principles of grammar, logic,
psychology! In one word, by such a knowledge of the facts, ma-
terial and spiritual, that most appertain to his art, as, if it have been
governed and applied by good sense, and rendered instinctive by
habit, becomes the representative and reward of our past conscious
reasonings, insights, and conclusions, and acquires the name of
taste. By what rule that does not leave the reader at the poet's
mercy, and the poet at his own, is the latter to distinguish between
the language suitable to suppressed, and the language which is
characteristic of indulged, anger? Or between that of rage and
that of jealousy? Is it obtained by wandering about in search of
angry or jealous people in uncultivated society, in order to copy
their words? Or not far rather by the power of imagination pro-
ceeding upon the all in each of human nature? By meditation,
rather than by observation? And by the latter in consequence only
of the former? As eyes, for which the former has pre-determined
their field of vision, and to which, as to its organ, it communicates
a microscopic power? There is not, I firmly believe, a man now
living, who has from his own inward experience, a clearer intuition
than Mr. Wordsworth himself, that the last mentioned are the true
sources of genial discrimination. Through the same process, and
by the same creative agency, will the poet distinguish the degree

<page 225>
234 B10GRAPHIA MTERAKIA.
and kind of the excitement produced by the very act of poetic com-
position. As intuitively will he know, what differences of style it
at once inspires and justifies; what intermixture of conscious voli-
tion is natural to that state; and in what instances such figures and
colours of speech degenerate into mere creatures of an arbitrary
purpose, cold technical artifices of ornament or connection. For
even as truth is its own light and evidence, discovering at once it-
self and falsehood, so is it the prerogative of poetic genius to distinguish, by parental instinct, its proper offspring from the change-
lings which the gnomes of vanity or the fairies of fashion may have
laid in its cradle, or called by its names. Could a rule be given
from without, poetry would cease to be poetry, and sink into a me-
chanical art. It would be ^ootpus'S not tfonjfis. The rules of the
imagination are themselves the very powers of growth and produc-
tion. The words to which they are reducible present only the out-
lines and external appearance of the fruit. A deceptive counter-
feit of the superficial form and colours may be elaborated; but the marble peach feels cold and heavy, and children only put it to their
mouths. We find no difficulty in admitting as excellent, and the
legitimate language of poetic fervour self-impassioned, Donne's
apostrophe to the Sun in the second stanza of his " Progress of the
Soul."
"Thee, eye of heaven! this great soul envies not:
By thy male force is all we have, begot.
In the first East thou now beginn'st to shine,
Suck'st early balm and island spices there;
And wilt anon in tby loose-rein'd career
At Tagus, Po, Seine, Thames, and Danow dine,
And see at night this western world of mine: Yet hast thou not more nations seen, than she,
Who before thee one day began to be,
And, thy frail light being quenched, shall long, long out-live thee'.'
Or the next stanza but one:
"Great destiny, the commissary of God,
That hast marked out a path and period
For ev'ry thing! Who, where we offspring took,
Our ways and ends see'st at one instant: thou
Knot of all causes! Thou, whose changeless brow
Ne'er smiles or frowns! O vouchsafe thou to look
And show my story in thy eternal book," &c.
As little difficulty do we find in excluding from the honours of
unaffected warmth and elevation the madness prepense of Fseudo-

<page 226>
BIOGRAPHIA LITEUARIA. 225
poesy, or the startling hysteric of weakness ever exerting itself,
which bursts on the unprepared reader in sundry odes and apostro-
phes to abstract terms. Such are the Odes to Jealousy, to Hope,
to Oblivion, and the like in Dodsley's collection, and the maga-
zines of that day, which seldom fail to remind me of an Oxford
copy of verses on the two Suttons, commencing with
"Inocclation, heavenly maid! descend!"
It is not to be denied that men of undoubted talents, and even
poets of true, though not of first rate genius, have, from a mistaken
theory, deluded both themselves and others in the opposite ex-
treme. I once read, to a company of sensible and well-educated
women, the introductory period of Cowley's preface to his " Pin-
daric Odes, written in imitation of the style and manner of the Odes
of Pindar." "If (says Cowley) a man should undertake to trans-
late Pindar, word for word, it would be thought that one madman
had translated another; as may appear, when he, that understands
not the original, reads the verbal traduction of him into Latin prose,
than which nothing seems more raving." I then proceeded with
his own free version of the second Olympic, composed for the
charitable purpose of rationalizing the Theban Eagle.
"Queen of all harmonious things,
Dancing words and speaking strings,
What God, what hero, wilt thou sing 1
What happy man to equal glories bring?
Begin, begin thy noble choice,
And let the hills around reflect the image of thy voice.
Pisa does to Jove belong,
Jove and Pisa claim thy song.
The fair first-fruits of war, th'Olympic games,
Alcides offer'd up to Jove;
Alcides too thy strings may move!
But oh! what man to join with these can worthy prove?
Join Theron boldly to their sacred names;
Theron the next honour claims;
Theron to no man gives place;
Is first in Pisa's and in Virtue's race;
Theron there, and he alone,
E'en his own swift forefathers has outgone."
One of the company exclaimed, with the full assent of the rest,
that if the original were madder than this, it must be incurably mad.
I then translated the ode from the Greek, and, as nearly as possi-
28

<page 227>
226 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
ble, word for word; and the impression was, that in the general
movement of the periods, in the form of the connections and transi-
tions, and in the sober majesty of lofty sense, it appeared to them
to approach more nearly than any other poetry they had heard, to
fhe style of our bible in the prophetic books. The first strophe
will suffice as a specimen:
"Ye harp-controuling hymns! (or) ye hymns the sovereigns of harps!
What God? what Hero?
What man shall we celebrate ?.
Truly, Pisa is of Jove,
But the Olympiad (or the Olympic games) did Hercules establish,
The first fruits of the spoils of war.
But Theron for the four-horsed car,
That bore victory to him,
It behooves us now to voice aloud;
The Just, the Hospitable,
The Bulwark of Agrigentum,
Of renowned fathers
The Flower, even him
Who preserves his native city erect and safe."
But are such rhetorical caprices condemnable only for their der
yiation from their language of real Jife? and are they by no other
means to be precluded, but by the rejection of all distinctions between prose and verse, save that of metre 1 Surely, good sense,
and a moderate insight into the constitution of the human mind,
would be amply sufficient to prove, that such language and such
combinations are the native produce neither of the fancy nor of the
imagination ; that their operation consists in the excitement of sur-
prise by the juxta-position and appprenjt Reconciliation of widely
different or incompatible things. As when, for instance, the hills
are made to reflect the image of a voice. Surely, no unusual taste
is requisite to see clearly, and that this compulsory juxta-position
is not produced by the presentation of impressive or delightful
forms to the inward vision, nor by any sympathy with the modify-
ing powers with which the genius of the poet had united and in-
spirited all the objects of his thought; that it is therefore a species
of wit, a pure work of the will, and implies a leisure and self-pos-
session both of thought and of feeling, incompatible with the steady
fervour of a mind possessed and filled with the grandeur of its sub-
ject. To sum up the whole in one sentence: When a poem, or a
part of a poem, shall be adduced, which is evidently vicious in the

<page 228>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 227
figures and contexture of its style, yet for the condemnation of
which no reason can be assigned, except that it differs from the
style in which men actually converse; then, and not till then, can
I hold this theory to be either plausible or practicable, or capable
of furnishing either rule, guidance, or precaution, that might not,
more easily and more safely, as well as more naturally, have been deduced in the author's own mind, from considerations of gram-
mar, logic, and the truth and nature of things, confirmed by the
authority of works, whose fame is not of one country, nor of one age.

<page 229>
CHAPTER XIX.
Continuation—Concerning the real object which, it is probable, Mr. Wordsworth
had before him in his critical preface—Elucidation and application of this.
It might appear from some passages in the former part of Mr.
Wordsworth's preface, that he meant to confine his theory of style,
and the necessity of a close accordance with the actual language
of men, to those particular subjects from low and rustic life, which,
by way of experiment, he had purposed to naturalize as a new spe-
cies in our English poetry. But from the train of argument that
follows; from the reference to Milton; and from the spirit of his
critique on Gray's sonnet, those sentences appear to have been
rather courtesies of modesty than actual limitations of his system.
Yet so groundless does this system appear on a close examination;
and so strange and overwhelming in its consequences,* that I can-
not, and I do not, believe that the poet did ever himself adopt it in
the unqualified sense in which his expressions have been understood
by others, and which, indeed, according to all the common laws of
interpretation, they seem to bear. What then did he mean? I ap-
prehend, that in the clear perception, not unaccompanied with dis-
gust or-contempt, to the gaudy affectations of a style which passed
too current with too many for poetic diction, (though, in truth, it had
as little pretensions to poetry as to logic or common sense,) he nar-
rowed his view for the time; and feeling a justifiable preference for
the language of nature and of good sense, even in its humblest and
least ornamented forms, he suffered himself to express, in terms at
once too large and too exclusive, his predilection for a style the
most remote possible from the false and showy splendor which he
wished to explode. It is possible, that this predilection, at first
* I had in my mind the striking but untranslatable epithet, which the celebra-
ted Mendelossohn applied to the great founder of the Critical Philosophy, "Der
al/eszermalmende Kant." i. e. the all-becrushing, or rather the all-to-nothing-
crushing Kant. In the facility and force of compound epithets, the German, from
the number of its cases and inflections, approaches to the Greek: that language so
"Bless'd in the happy marriage of sweet words."
It is in the woful harshness of its sounds alone that the German need shrink
from the comparison. i

<page 230>
MOGRAPHIA L1TERAIUA. 229
merely comparative, deviated for a time into direct partiality. But
the real object which he had in view was, I doubt not, a species of
excellence which had been long before most happily characterized
by the judicious and amiable Garve, whose works are so justly be-
loved and esteemed by the Germans, in his remarks on Gellert,
(see Sammlung Einiger Abhandlunged von Christian Garve) from
which the following is literally translated. "The talent that is re-
quired in order to make excellent verses, is perhaps greater than the
philosopher is ready to admit, or would find it in his power to ac-
quire: the talent to seek only the apt expression of the thought, and
yet to find at the same time with it the rhyme and the metre. Gel-
lert possessed this happy gift, if ever any one of our poets possessed
it; and nothing perhaps contributed more to the great and universal
impression which his fables made on their first publication, or condu-
ces more to their continued popularity. It was a strange and curi-
ous phenomenon, and such as, in Germany, had been previously un-
heard of, to read verses in which every thing was expressed, just as
one would wish to talk, and yet all dignified, attractive and inter-
esting; and all at the same time perfectly correct as to the measure
of the syllables and the rhyme. It is certain that poetry, when it
has attained this excellence, makes a far greater impression than
prose. So much so, indeed, that even the gratification which the
very rhymes afford, becomes then no longer a contemptible or trifling
gratification."
However novel this phenomenon may have been in Germany at
the time of Gellert, it is by no means new, nor yet of recent exis-
tence in our language. Spite of the licentiousness with which Spen-
cer occasionally compels the orthography of his words into a sub-
servience to his rhymes, the whole Fairy Queen is an almost con-
tinued instance of this beauty. Waller's song, " Go, lovely Rose,
&c." is doubtless familiar to most of my readers; but if I had hap-
pened to have had by me the Poems of Cotton, more, but far less
deservedly, celebrated as the author of Virgil travestied, I should
have indulged myself, and, I think, have gratified many who are not
acquainted with his serious works, by selecting some admirable spe-
cimens of this style. There are not a few poems in that volume,
replete with every excellence of thought, image, and passion, which
we expect or desire in the poetry of the milder muse; and yet so
worded, that the reader sees no one reason either in the selection

<page 231>
230 BIOCRAPHIA LITERARIA.
or the order of the words, why he might not have said the very same
in an appropriate conversation, and cannot conceive how indeed he
could have expressed such thoughts otherwise, without loss or injury
to his meaning.
But, in truth, our language is, and, from the first dawn of poetry,
ever has been, particularly rich in compositions distinguished by this
excellence. The final e, which is now mute, in Chaucer's age was
either sounded or dropt indifferently. We ourselves still use either
beloved or belov'd, according as the rhyme, or measure, or the pur-
pose of more or less solemnity may require. Let the reader, then,
only adopt the pronunciation of the poet, and of the court at which
he lived, both with respect to the final e and to the accentuation of
the last syllable, I would then venture to ask what, even in the col-
loquial language of elegant and unaffected women, (who are the pe-
culiar mistresses of " pure English, and undefiled,") what could we
hear more natural, or seemingly more unstudied, than the following
stanzas from Chaucer's Troilus and Creseide.
"And after this forth to the gate he went,
Ther as Creseide nut rode a full godc paas:
And up and doun there made he many a wente,
And to himself full oft he said, Alas!
Fro hennis rode my blisse and my solas:
As would blisful God now for his joie,
I might her sene agen come into Troie! And to the yonder hill I gan her guide,
Alas! and there I took of herjny leave:
And yond I saw her to her fathir ride;
For sorrow of which mine hearte shall to-cleve ■
And hithir home I came when it was eve;
And here I dwel; out-cast from alle joie,
And shall, til I maie sene her efte in Troie.
And of himselfe imaginid he ofte
To ben defaitid, pale and waxen less
Than he was wonte, and that men saidin softe,
What may it be? who can the sothe guess,
Why Troilus hath all this heaviness?
And al this n' as but his melancholic,
That he had of himselfe suche fantasie.
Another time imaginin he would
That every wight, that passed him by the wey
Had of him routhe, and that they saien should,
I am right sorry, Troilus will die!
And thus he drove a daie yet forth or twey,
As ye have herde: suche life gan he to lede
As he that strode betwixin hope and drede:

<page 232>
BIOGRAPHIA UTEKARIA. 231
For which him likid in his songis shewe
Th' eucheson of his wo as he best might,
And made a songe of wordis but a fewe,
Somewhat his woefull herte for to light,
And when he was from every mann'is sight
Witlisofte voice he of his lady dere,
That absent was, gan sing as ye may hear: N
# # * » * * *
This song when he thus songin had, full soon
He fell again into his sighis olde: And every night, as was his wonte to done,
He stode the bright moone to beholde
And all his sorrowe to the moone he tolde,
And said: I wis, when thou art hornid nevve,
I shall be glad, if al the world be trewe!"
Another exquisite master of this species of style, where the scholar
and the poet supplies the material, but the perfect well-bred gentle-
man the expressions and the arrangement, is George Herbert. As
from the nature of the subject, and the too frequent quaintness of
the thoughts, his " Temple, or Sacred Poems and Private Ejacula-
tions," are comparatively but little known, I shall extract two poems.
The first is a sonnet, equally admirable for the weight, number, and
expression of the thoughts, and for the simple dignity of the lan-
guage. (Unless, indeed, a fastidious taste should object to the lat-
ter half of the sixth line.) The second is a poem of greater length,
which I have chosen not only for the present purpose, but, likewise,
as a striking example and illustration of an assertion hazarded in a
former page of these sketches: namely, that the characteristic fault
of our elder poets is the reverse of that which distinguishes too many
of our more recent versifiers; the one conveying the most fantastic
thoughts in the most correct and natural language; the other in
the most fantastic language conveying the most trivial thoughts.
The latter is a riddle of words; the former an enigma of thoughts.
The one reminds me of an odd passage in Drayton's Ideas:
Sonnet IX.
As other men, so I myself do muse, Why in this sort I wrest invention so;And why these giddy metaphors I use, Leaving the path the greater part do go? ,
I will resolve you: / am lunatic!
The other recalls a still odder passage in the " Synagogue; or
the Shadow of the Temple," a connected series of poems in imita-
tion of Herbert's " Temple," and in some editions annexed to it.

<page 233>
232 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
O how my mind
Is gravell'd!
Not a thought,
That I can find,
But's ravell'd
AH to nought!
Short ends of threds,
And narrow shreds
Of lists;
Knot's snarled ruffs,
Loose broken tufts Of twists; -^
Are my torn meditations' ragged clothing,
Which, wound and woven, shape a sute for nothing:
One while I think, and then I am in pain
To think how to unthink that thought again!
Immediately after these burlesque passages, I cannot proceed to
the extracts promised, without changing the ludicrous tone of feel-
ing by the interposition of the three following stanzas of Herbert's:
Sweet day so cool, so calm, so bright,
The bridal of the earth and sky:
The dew shall weep thy fall to night,
For thou must dye!
Sweet rose, whose hue angry and brave
Bids the rash gazer wipe his eye:
Thy root is ever in its grave,
And thou must dye!
Sweet spring, full of sweet days and roses,
A nest, where sweets compacted lie: My music shows ye have your closes,
And all must dye!
THE BOSOM-SIN.
A Sonnet, by George Herbert.
Lord, with what care hast thou begirt us round?
Parents firsTTBeason usf • "then"scho61masters
Deliver us to laws; they send us bound
To rules oTTeason, holy messengers,
Pulpits and Sundays, sorrow doggingsin,
Afflictions sorted, anguish of all sizes, Fine nets and stratagems to catch us in,
\ Bibles laid open, millions of surprises;
\ Blessings before hand, ties ofgratefulness,
The sound of glory ringing in our ears:Without, our shame; within, our consciences;
\ 1

<page 234>
/
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 233Angels and grace, eternal hopes and fears!
Yet all these fences, and their whole array,
One canning bosom-sin blows quite away.
IQVE UHKNOWK.
Dear friend, sit down, the tale is long and sad:
And in my faintings, I presume, your love ,
Will more comply than help. A Lord I had,
And have, of whom some grounds, which may improve,
I hold for two lives, and both lives in me.
To him I brought a dish of fruit one day
And in the middle placed my heart. But he
(I sigh to say)
Lookt on a servant who did know his eye,
Better than you knew me, or (which is one)
Than I myself. The servant instantly,
Quitting the fruit, seiz'd on my heart alone,
And threw it in a font, wherein did fall
A stream of blood, which issued from the side
Of a great rock: I well remember all,
And have good cause: there it was dipt and dy'd, And washt, and wrung! the very ringing yet
Enforceth tears.*) \Your heart was foul, 1 fear.
Indeed 'tis true. I did and do commit
Many a fault, more than my lease will bear;
Yet still ask'd pardon, and was not deny'd.
But you shall hear. After my heart was well,
And clean and fair, as I one eventide,
(I sigh to tell,)
Walkt by myself abroad, I saw a large
And spacious furnace flaming, and thereon
A boiling caldron, round about whose verge
Was in great letters set AFFLICTION.
The greatness show'd the owner. So I went
To fetch a sacrifice out of my fold, Thinking with that, which I did thus present,
To warm his love, which, I did fear, grew cold.
But as my heart did tender it, the man
Who was to take it from me, slipt his hand,
And threw my heart into the scalding pan;
My heart that brought it (do you understand ?)
The offerer's heart. Your heart was hard, I fear.
Indeed 'tis true. I found a callous matter
Began to spread and to expatiate there:
But with a richer blood than scalding water
I bathed it often, e'en with holy blood,
Which at a board, while many drank bare wine,
A friend did steal into my cup for good,
E'en taken inwardly, and most divine
To supple hardnesses. But at the length
29 ,• .

<page 235>
234 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
Out of the caldron getting, soon I fled
Unto my house, where to repair the strength
Which I had lost, I basted to my bed;
But when I thought to sleep out all these faults,
(I sigh to speak,)
I found that some had stuff'd the bed with thoughts,
I would say thorns. Dear, could my heart not break,
When with my pleasures even my rest was gone 1
Full well I understood who had been there;
For I had given the key to none but one:
It must be he. Your heart was dull, I fear.
Indeed a slack and sleepy state of mind
Did oft possess me; so that when I pray'd,
Though my lips went, my heart did stay behind.
But all my scores were by another paid,
Who took my guilt upon him. Truly, friend;
For ought I hear, your matter slimes to you
More favor than you wot of. Mark the end!
The font did only what was old renew:
The caldron suppled what was grown too hard:
The thorns did quicken what was grown too dull:
All did but strive to mend what you had marr'd.
Wherefore be cheer'd, and praise him to the full
Each day, each hour, each moment of the week,
Who fain would have you be new, tender, quick!
: •

<page 236>
CHAPTER XX.
The former subject continued—The neutral style, or that common to Proae and
Poetry, exemplified by specimens from Chaucer, Herbert, &c.
I have no fear in declaring my conviction,that the excellence de-
fined and exemplified in the preceding Chapter is not the character-
istic excellence of Mr. Wordsworth's style ; because I can add with
equal sincerity, that it is precluded by higher powers. The praise
of uniform adherence to genuine, logical English, is undoubtedly his;
nay, laying the main emphasis on the word uniform, I will dare add,
that of all contemporary poets, it is his alone. For in a less abso-
lute sense of the word, I should certainly include Mr. Bowles,
Lord Byron, and, as to all his later writings, Mr. Southey, the
exceptions in their works being so few and unimportant. But of the
specific excellence described in the quotation from Garve, I appear
to find more and more undoubted specimens in the work of others;
for instance, among the minor poems of Mr. Thomas Moore, and
of our illustrious Laureate. To me it will always remain a singular
and noticeable fact, that a theory which would establish this lingua
communis, not only as the best, but as the only commendable style,
should have proceeded from a poet whose diction, next to that of
Shakspeare and Milton, appears to me of all others the most indi-
vidualized and characteristic. And let it be remembered, too, that
I am now interpreting the controverted passages of Mr. W.'s critical
preface by the purpose and object which he may be supposed to
have intended, rather than by the sense which the words themselves
must convey, if they are taken without this allowance.
A person of any taste, who had but studied three or four of Shak-
speare's principal plays, would, without the name affixed, scarcely
fail to recognize as Shakspeare's, a quotation from any other play,
though but of a few lines. A similar peculiarity, though in a less
degree, attends Mr. Wordsworth's style, whenever he speaks in his
own person; or whenever, though under a feigned name, it is clear
that he himself is still speaking, as in the different dramatis persona?
of the "Recluse." Even in the other poems in which he purpo-
ses to be most dramatic, there are few in which it does not occa-

<page 237>
236 BIOORAPHIA LITERARIA.
sionally burst forth. The reader might often address the poet in
his own words with reference to the persons introduced:
"It seems, aa I retrace the ballad line by line,
That but half of it is their*, and the better half is thine."
Who, having been previously acquainted with any considerable
portion of Mr. Wordsworth's publications, and having studied them
with a full feeling of the author's genius, would not at once claim
as Wordsworthian, the little poem on the rainbow?
"The child is father of the man, &c."
Or in the " Lucy Gray 1*
"No mate, no comrade Lucy knew;
She dwelt on a wide moor;
The sweetest thing thai ever grew
Betide a human door."
Or in the " IdJe Shepherd-boys V
"Along the river's stony marge
The sand-lark chants a joyous song;
The thrush is busy in the wood,
And carols loud and strong.
A thousand, lambs are on the rock
All newly born! both earth and sky
Keep jubilee, and more than all,
Those boys with their green coronal,
They never hear the cry,
That plaintive cry which up the hill
Comes from the depth of Dungeon Gill."
Need I mention the exquisite description of the Sea Lock in the
"Blind Highland Boy." Who but a poet tells a tale in such lan-
guage to the little ones by the fireside as—
"Yet had he many a restless dream,
Both when he heard the eagle's scream,
And when he heard the ton-rent's roar,
And heard the water beat the shore
Near where their cottage stood.
Reside a lake their cottage stood,
Not small like ours a peaceful flood;
But one of mighty size, and strange' That rough or smooth is full of change
And stirring in its bed.

<page 238>
BIOGBAPHIA LITERARIA. 237
For to this lake by night and day,
The great sea-water finds its way
Through long, long windings of the hills,
And drinks up all the pretty rills;
And rivers large and strong:
Then hurries back the road it came—
Returns on errand still the same;
This did it when the earth was new;
And this for evermore will do,
As long as earth shall last.
And with the coming of the tide,
Come boats and ships that sweetly ride,
Between the woods and lofty rocks;
And to the shepherd with their flocks
Bring tales of distant lands."
I might quote almost the whole of his " Ruth," but take the fol-
lowing stanzas:
. "But as you have before been told,
This stripling, sportive gay and bold,
And with his dancing crest,
So beautiful, through savage lands
Had roam'd about with vagrant bands
Of Indians in the West.
The wind, the tempest roaring high,
The tumult of a tropic sky, Might well be dangerous food
For him, a youth to whom was given
So much of earth, so much of heaven,
And such impetuous blood.
Whatever in those climes he found
Irregular in sight or sound,
Did to his mind impart
A kindred impulse; seem'd allied
To his own powers, and justified
The workings of his heart.
Nor less to feed voluptuous thought
The beauteous forms of nature wrought,
Fair trees and lovely flowers;
The breezes their own languor lent,
The stars had feelings, which they sent Into those magic bowers.
Yet in his worst pursuits, I ween,
That sometimes there did intervene
Pure hopes of high intent.


<page 239>
238 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
For passions, linked to forms so fair
And stately, needs must have their share
Of noble sentiment."
But from Mr. Wordsworth's more elevated compositions, which
already form three-fourths of his works; and will, I trust, constitute
hereafter a still larger proportion ;—from these, whether in rhyme
or blank verse, it would be difficult, and almost superfluous, to
select instances of a diction peculiarly his own; of a style which
cannot be imitated without its being at once recognized, as origina-
ting in Mr. Wordsworth. It would not be easy to open on any one
of his loftier strains, that does not contain examples of this; and
more in proportion as the lines are more excellent, and most like
the author. For those who may happen to have been less familiar
with his writings, I will give three specimens taken with little choice.
The first from the'lines on the " Boy op Winander-Mere,"—who
"Blewmimic hootings to the silent owls,
That they might answer him. And they would shout,
Across the watery vale and shout again
With longhalloos, and screams, and echoes loud
Redoubled and redoubled, concourse wild
Of mirth, and jocund din. And when itchanc'd,
That pauses of deep silence mock'd his skill,
Then sometimes in that silence, while he hung
Listening, a gentle shock of mild surprise
Has carried far into his heart Hie voice. ,
Of mountain torrents / or the visible scene*
•Mr. Wordworth'shaviagjudiciously adopted "concourse wild" in this passage
for uawild scene17 as it stood in the former edition, encourages me to hazard a
remark, which I certainly should not have made in the works of a poet less aus-
terely accurate in the use of words, than he is, to his own great honour. It re-
spects the propriety of the word "scene" eveti in the sentence in which it is re-
tained. Dkydk,v, and he only in his more careless verses, was the first, as far aa
my researches have discovered, who for the convenience of rhyme used this
word in the vague sense, which has been since too current, even in our best wri-
ters, and which (unfortunately, I think) is given as its first explanation in Dr.
Johnson's Dictionary, and therefore would be taken by an incautious reader as
its proper sense. In Shakspeare and Milton, the word is never used without some
clear reference, proper or metaphorical to the theatre. Thus Milton;
"Cedar and pine, and fir, and branching palm,
A Sylvan*t'c««; and as the ranks ascend
Shade above shade, a woody theatre
Of stateliest view.''
I object to any extension of its meaning, because the word is already more
equivocal than might be wished; inasmuch as in the limited use which I recom-
mend, it may still signify two different things; namely, the scenery, and the char-
acters and actions presented on the stage during the presence of particular scenes.
It can therefore be preserved from obscurity only by keeping the original signifi-
cation full in the mind. Thus Milton again;
"Prepare thou for another scene."

<page 240>
B10GRAPHIA LITERARIA. 239
i
Would enter unawares into his mind
With all its solemn imagery, Us rocks,
Its woods, and that uncertain heaven, received
Into the bosom of the steady lake"
The second shall be that noble imitation of Drayton* (if it was
not rather a coincidence) in the "Joanna."
"When I had gazed perhaps two minute's space,
Joanna, looking in my eyes, beheld
That ravishment of mine, and laugh'd aloud.
The rock, like something starting from a sleep,
Took up the lady's voice, and laugh'd again!That ancient woman seated on Helm-crag
Was ready with her cavern! Hammar-scar, And the tall steep of Silver-How sent forth
A noise of laughter: southern Loughrigg heard,
And Fairfield answered with a mountain tone,
Helvillon far into the clear blue sky
Carried the lady's voice!—old Skiddaw blew
His speaking trumpet!—back out of the clouds
From Glaramara southward came the voice:
And Kirkstone tossed it from his misty head!"
The third, which is in rhyme, I take from the "Song-at the
feast of Brougham Castle upon the restoration of Lord Clifford, the
shepherd, to the estates of his ancestors."
"Now another day is come
Fitter hopes, and nobler doom:
He hath thrown aside his crook,
And hath buried deep his book;
Armour rusting in the halls
On the blood of Clifford calls;Quell the Scot, exclaims the lance! -"Bear me to the heart of France
Is the longing of the shield—
* Which Copland scarce had spoke, but quickly every hill
Upon her verge that stands, the neighboring valleys fill:
Helvillon from his height, it through the mountains threw.
From whom as soon again, the sound Dunbalrase drew,
From whose stone-trophied head, it on the Wendross went,
Which, tow'rds the sea again, resounded it to Dent:
That Broadwater, therewith within her banks astound,
In sailing to the sea told it to Egremound,
Whose buildings, walks, and streets, with echoes loud and long,
Did mightily commend old Copland for her song!
Dravton's Polvolbion: Song XXX.

<page 241>
240 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARU.
Tell thy name, thou trembling field! ,*».'■
Field of death, where'er thou be,
Groan thou with our victory!
Happy day, and mighty hour,
When our shepherd, in his power,
Mailed and horsed with iance and sword,
To his ancestors restored,
Like a re-appearing star,
Like a glory from afar,
First shall head the flock of tear.'"
Alas! the fervent harper did not know,
That for a tranquil soul the lay was framed,
Who, long compelled in humble walks to go,
Was softened into feeling, soothed, and tamed.
Love had he found in huts where poor men lie:
His daily teachers had been woods and rills,
The silence that is in the starry sky,
The sleep that is among the lonely hills."
The words themselves in the foregoing extracts are, no doubt,
sufficiently common, for the greater part. (But in what poem are
they not so? if we except a few misadventurous attempts to trans-
late the arts and sciences into verse?) In the "Excursion," the
number of polysyllabic (or what the common people call, dictionary)
words is more than usually great. (And so must it needs be, in pro-
portion to the number and variety of an author's conceptions, and
his solicitude to express them with precision.) But are those
words in those places, commonly employed in real life to express
the same thought or outward thing? Are they the style used in the
ordinary intercourse of spoken words? No! nor are the modes of
connexions: and still less the breaks and transitions. Would any
but a poet—at least could any one without being conscious that he
had expressed himself with noticeable vivacity—have described a
bird singing loud by, " The thrush is busy in the wood?" Or have
spoken of boys with a string of club-moss round their rusty hats, as
the boys "with their green coronal?" Or have translated a beau-
tiful May day, into "Both earth and sky keep jubilee?" Or have
brought all the different marks and circumstances of a sea-lock be-
fore the mind, as the actions of a living and acting power 1 Or have
represented the reflection of the sky in the water, as " That uncer-
tain heaven received into the bosom of the steady lake?" Even the
grammatical construction is not unfrequently peculiar; as "The
wind, the tempest roaring high, the tumult of a tropic sky, might

<page 242>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERAR1A. 241
well be dangerous food to him, a youth to whom was given,
&c." There is a peculiarity in the frequent use of the dsuvajTrjTov
(i. e. the omission of the connective particle before the last of sev-
eral words, or several sentences, used grammatically as single
words, all being in the same case, and governing or governed by
the same verb) and not less in the construction of words by appo-
sition (to him a youth.) In short, were there excluded from Mr. Wordsworth's poetic compositions all that a literal adherence to the
theory of his preface would exclude, two thirds at least, of the mark-
ed beauties of his poetry must be erased. For a far greater num-
ber of lines would be sacrificed, than in any other recent poet; be-
cause the pleasure received from Wordsworth's poems being less
derived either from excitement of curiosity, or the rapid flow of nar-
ration, the striking passages form a larger proportion of their value.
I do not adduce it as a fair criterion of comparative excellence, nor
do I even think it such; but merely as matter of fact. I affirm,
that from no contemporary writer could so many lines be quoted,
without reference to the poem in which they are found, for their own
independent weight or beauty. From the sphere of my own expe-
rience I can bring to my recollection three persons of no every day
powers and acquirements, who had read the poems of others with
more and more unallayed pleasure, and had thought more highly of
their authors, as poets; who yet have confessed to me, that from
no modern work had so many passages started up anew in their
minds at different times, and as different occasions had awakened
a meditative mood.
30

<page 243>
CHAPTER XXL
Remarks on the present mode of conducting critical journals.
Long have I wished to see a fair and philosophical inquisition
into the character of Wordsworth, as a poet, on the evidence of his
published works; and a positive, not a comparative, appreciation
of their characteristic excellences, deficiences, and defects. I
know no claim, that the mere opinion of any individual can have to
weigh down the opinion of the author himself; against the proba-
bility of whose parental partiality we ought to set that of his having
thought longer and more deeply on the subject. But I should call
that investigation fair and philosophical, in which the critic announ-
ces and endeavors to establish the principles, which he holds for
the foundation of poetry in general, with the specification of these
in their application to the different classes of poetry. Having thus
prepared his canons of criticism for praise and condemnation, he
would proceed to particularize the most striking passages to which
he deems them applicable, faithfully noticing the frequent or in-
frequent recurrence of similar merits or defects, and as faithfully
distinguishing what is characteristic from what is accidental, or a
mere flagging of the wing. Then, if his premises be rational, his
deductions legitimate, and his conclusions justly applied, the read-
er, and possibly the poet himself, may adopt his judgment in the
light of judgment, and in the independence of free agency. If he
has erred, he presents his errors in a definite place and tangible
form, and holds the torch and guides the way to their detection.
I most willingly admit, and estimate at a high value, the services
which the Edinburgh Review, and others formed afterwards on
the same plan, have rendered to society in the diffusion of know-
ledge. I think the commencement of the Edinburgh Review, an
important epoch in periodical criticism; and that it has a claim up-
on the gratitude of the literary republic, and, indeed, of the reading
public at large, for having originated the scheme of reviewing those
books only which are susceptible and deserving of argumentative
criticism. Not less meritorious, and far more faithfully, and, in
general, far more ably executed, is their plan of supplying the vacant

<page 244>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 343
place of the trash of mediocrity, wisely left to sink into oblivion by
their own weight, with original essays on the most interesting sub-
jects of the time, religious, or political; in which the titles of the
books or pamphlets prefixed furnish only the name and occasion of
the disquisition. I do not arraign the keenness or asperity of its
damnatory style, in and for itself, as long as the author is address-
ed or treated as the mere impersonation of the work then under
trial. I have no quarrel with them on this account, as long as no
personal allusions are admitted, and no recommitment (for new tri-
al) of juvenile performances, that were published, perhaps forgotten,
many years before the commencement of the review: since for the
forcing back of such works to public notice no motives are easily
assignable, but such as are furnished to the critic by his own per-
sonal malignity; or what is still worse, by a habit of malignity in
the form of mere wantonness.
"No private grudge they need, no personal spite:
The viva seclio is its own delight!
All enmity, all envy, they disclaim,
Disinterested thieves of our good name:
Cool, sober murderers of their neighbor's fame!"
S. T. C
Every censure, every sarcasm respecting a publication which the
critic, with the criticised work before him, can make good, is the
critic's right. The writer is authorized to reply, but not to com-
plain. Neither can any one prescribe to the critic, how soft or
how hard; how friendly or how bitter, shall be the phrases which
he is to select for the expression of such reprehension or ridicule.
The critic must know what effect it is his object to produce; and
with a view to this effect must he weigh his words. But as soon
as the critic betrays that he knows more of his author than the au-
thor's publications could have told him; as soon as from this more
intimate knowledge, elsewhere obtained, he avails himself of the
slightest trait against the author, his censure instantly becomes
personal injury, his sarcasms personal insults. He ceases to be
a critic, and takes on him the most contemptible character to
which a rational creature can be degraded, that of a gossip, backbi-
ter, and pasquillant: but with this heavy aggravation, that he steals
the unquiet, the deforming passions of the World into the Museum;
into the very place, which, next to the chapel and oratory, should

<page 245>
244 BIOGRAPIIIA LITERAR1A.
be our sanctuary, and secure place of refuge; offers abominations
on the altar of the muses; and makes its sacred paling the very
circle in which he conjures up the lying and prophane spirit.
This determination of unlicensed personality, and of permitted
and legitimate censure (which I owe in part to the illustrious Les-
sing, himself a model of acute, spirited, sometimes stinging, but al-
ways argumentative and honourable criticism) is beyond controver-
sy, the true one: and though I would not myself exercise all the
rights of the latter, yet, let but the former be excluded, I submit my-
self to its exercise in the hands of others, without complaint and
without resentment.
Let a communication be formed between any number of learned
men in the various branches of science and literature; and wheth-
er the President and central committee be in London or Edinburgh,
if only they previously lay aside their individuality, and pledge them-
selves inwardly, as well as ostensibly, to administer judgment ac-
cording to a constitution and code of laws; and if by grounding
this code on the two-fold basis of universal morals and philosophic
reason, independent of all foreseen application to particular works
and authors, they obtain the right to speak each as the representa-
tive of their body corporate; they shall have honor and good wish-
es from me, and I shall accord to them their fair dignities, though
self assumed, not less cheerfully, than if I could inquire concerning
them in the herald's office, or turn to them in the book of peerage.
However loud may be the outcries for prevented or subverted rep-
utation, however numerous and impatient the complaints of merci-
less severity and insupportable despotism, I shall neither feel nor ut-
ter aught but to the defence and justification of the critical machine.
Should any literary Quixote find himself provoked by its sounds
and regular movements, T should admonish him with Sancho Pan-
za, that it is no giant, but a windmill; there it stands on its own
place, and its own hillock, never goes out of its way to attack any
one, and to none and from none either gives or asks assistance.
When the public press has poured in any part of its produce be-
tween its mill-stones, it grinds it off, one man's sack the same as
another, and with whatever wind may happen to be then blowing.
All the two and thirty winds are alike its friends. Of the whole
wide atmosphere it does not desire a single finger breadth more
than what is necessary for its sails to turn round in. But this space

<page 246>
BIOGRAPHIA MTEIIARIA. 245
must be left free and unimpeded. Gnats, beetles, wasps, butter-
flies, and the whole tribe of ephemerals and insignificants, may flit
in and out and between; may hum, and buzz, and jarr; may shrill
their tiny pipes, and wind their puny horns unchastised and unno-
ticed. But idlers and bravadoes of larger size and prouder show
must beware how they place themselves within its sweep. Much
less may they presume to lay hands on the sails, the strength of
which is neither greater nor less than as the wind is, which drives
them round. Whomsoever the remorseless arm slings aloft, or
whirls along with it in the air, he has himself alone to blame;
though when the same arm throws him from it, it will more often
double than break the force of his fall.
Putting aside the too manifest and too frequent interference of
national, party, and even personal predilection or aversion;
and reserving for deeper feelings those worse and more criminal
intrusions into the sacredness of private life, which not seldom mer-
it legal rather than literary chastisement, the two principal objects-
arid occasions which I find for blame and regret in the conduct of
the review in question are: first, its unfaithfulness to its own an-
nounced and excellent plan, by subjecting to criticism works nei-
ther indecent or immoral, yet of such trifling importance even in
point of size and according to the critic's own verdict, so devoid of
all merit, as must excite in the most candid mind the suspicion, ei-
ther that dislike or vindictive feelings were at work, or that there
was a cold prudential pre-determination to increase the sale of
the review, by flattering the malignant passions of human nature.
That I may not myself become subject to the charge which I am
bringing against others by an accusation without proof, I refer to
the article on Dr. Rennell's sermon, in the very first number of the
Edinburgh Review, as an illustration of my meaning. If in looking
through all the succeeding volumes the reader should find this a
solitary instance, I must submit to that painful forfeiture of esteem,
which awaits a groundless or exaggerated charge.
The second point of objection belongs to this review only in com-
mon with all other works of periodical criticism ; at least, it applies
in common to the general system of all, whatever exception there
may be in favour of particular articles. Or if it attaches to the Ed-
inburgh Review, and to its only corrival, (the Quarterly) with
any peculiar force; this results from the superiority of talent, ac-


<page 247>
246 BI0GRAPH1A LITEBARIA.
quirement, and information, which both have so undeniably display-
ed; and which doubtless deepens the regret, though not the blame.
I am referring to the substitution of assertion for argument; to the
frequency of arbitrary and sometimes petulant verdicts, not seldom
unsupported even by a single quotation from the work condemned,
which might at least have explained the critic's meaning, if it did
not prove the justice of his sentence. Even where this is not the
case, the extracts are too often made, without reference to any gen-
eral grounds or rules, from which the faultiness or inadmissibility of
the qualities attributed, may be deduced; and without any attempt
to show, that the qualities are attributable to the passage extracted.
I have met with such extracts from Mr. Wordsworth's poems, an-
nexed to such assertions, as led me to imagine that the reviewer,
having written his critique before he had read the work, had then
pricked with a pin for passages, wherewith to illustrate the various
branches of his preconceived opinions. By what principle of ra-
tional choice can we suppose a critic to have been directed (at least
in a christian country, and himself, we hope, a christian) who gives
the following lines, portraying the fervor of solitary devotion excited by the magnificent display of the Almighty's works, as a proof
and example of an author's tendency to downright ravings, and
absolute unintelligibility.
"O then what soul was his, when on the tops
Of the high mountains he beheld the sun
Rise up, and bathe the world in light! He looked—
Ocean and earth, the solid frame of earth,
And ocean's liquid mass, beneath him lay
In gladness and deep joy. The clouds were touched,
And in their silent faces did he read
Unutterable love! Sound needed none,
Nor any voice of joy: his spirit drank
The spectacle! sensation, soul, and form,
All melted into him. They swallowed up
His animal being; in them did he live,
And by them did he live: they were his life.
(Excursion.)
Can it be expected, that either the author or his admirers, should
be induced to pay any serious attention to decisions which prove
nothing but the pitiable state of the critic's own taste and sensibility?
On opening the Review they see a favorite passage, of the force

<page 248>
BIOGRAPHIA LITEUAHIA. 247
and truth of which they had an intuitive certainty in their own in-
ward experience confirmed, if confirmation it could receive, by the
sympathy of their most enlightened friends; some of whom, per-
haps, even in the world's opinion, hold a higher intellectual rank
than the critic himself would presume to claim. And this very pas-
sage they find selected as the characteristic effusion of a mind de-
serted by reason :' as furnishing evidence that the writer was raving,
or he could not have thus strung words together without sense or
purpose! No diversity of taste seems capable of explaining such a
contrast in judgment.
That I had over-rated the merit of a passage or poem ; that I had
erred concerning the degree of its excellence, I might be easily in-
duced to believe or apprehend. But that lines, the sense of which
I had analysed and found consonant with all the best convictions
of my understanding; and the imagery and diction of which had
collected round those convictions my noblest, as well as my most
delightful feelings; that I should admit such lines to be mere non-
sense or lunacy, is too much for the most ingenious arguments to
effect. But that such a revolution of taste should be brought about
by a few broad assertions, seems little less than impossible. On
the contrary, it would require an effort of charity not to dismiss the
criticism with the aphorism of the wise man, in animam malevolam
sapientia haud intrare potest.
What, then, if this very critic should have cited a large number
of single lines, and even of long paragraphs, which he himself ac-
knowledges to possess eminent and original beauty? What if he
himself has owned, that beauties as great are scattered in abun-
dance throughout the whole book? And yet, though under this im-
pression, should have commenced his critique in vulgar exultation,
with a prophecy meant to secure its own fulfilment? With a "This
won't do!" What? if after such acknowledgments, extorted from
his own judgment, he should proceed from charge to charge of
tameness, and raving; flights and flatness; and at length, consign-
ing the author to the house of incurables, should conclude with a
strain of rudest contempt, evidently grounded in the distempered
state of his own moral associations? Suppose, too, all this done
without a single leading principle established or even announced,
and without any one attempt at argumentative deduction, though
the poet had presented a more than usual opportunity for it, by hav-

<page 249>
248 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
ing previously made public his own principles of judgment in po-
etry, and supported them by a connected train of reasoning!The office and duty of the poet is to select the most dignified as well as
"The happiest, gayest attitude of things."
The reverse, for in all cases a reverse is possible, is the appropriate
business of burlesque and travesty, a predominant taste for which,
has been always deemed a mark of a low and degraded mind.
When I was at Rome, among many other visits to the tomb of Ju-
lius II., 1 went thitheronce with a Prussian artist, a man of genius
and great vivacity of feeling. As we were gazing on Michael An-
gelo's Moses, our conversation turned on the horns and beard of
that stupendous statue; of the necessity of each to support the oth-
er; of the super-human effect of the former, and the necessity of the
existence of both to give a harmony and integrity both to the image
and the feeling excited by it. Conceive them removed, and the
statue would become «n-natural, without being swper-natural. We
called to mind the horns of the rising sun, and I repeated the noble
passage from Taylor's Holy Dying. That horns were the emblem
of power and sovereignty among the Eastern nations, and are still
retained as such in Abyssinia; the Achelous of the ancient Greeks;
and the probable ideas and feelings, that originally suggested the
mixture of the human and the brute form in the figure, by which
they realized the idea of their mysterious Pan, as representing intel-
ligence blended with a darker power, deeper, mightier, and more
universal than the conscious intellect of man; than intelligence;
—all these thoughts and recollections passed in procession before
our minds. My companion, who possessed more than his share of
the hatred which his countrymen bore to the French, had just ob-
served to me, "a Frenchman, Sir! is the only animal in the human
shape, that by no possibility can lift itself up to religion or poetry:"
When, lo! two French officers of distinction and rank entered the
church !" Mark you," whispered the Prussian, "the first thing
which those scoundrels will notice, (for they will begin by instantly
noticing the statue in parts, without one moment's pause of admira-
tion impressed by the whole) will be the horns and the beard. And
the associations, which they will immediately connect with them, will
be those of a he-goat and a cuckold." Never did man guess
more luckily. Had he inherited a portion of the great legislator's

<page 250>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERAR1A. 249
prophetic powers, whose statue we had been contemplating, he
could scarcely have uttered words more coincident with the result;
for even as he had said so it came to pass.
In the Excursion, the poet has introduced an old man, born in
humble but not abject circumstances, who had enjoyed more than
usual advantages of education, both from books and from the more
awful discipline of nature. This person he represents, as having
been driven by the restlessness of fervid feelings, and from a cra-
ving intellect to an itinerant life; and as having in consequence
passed the larger portion of his time, from earliest manhood, in
villages and hamlets from door to door,
"A vagraut merchant bent beneath his load."
Now whether this be a character appropriate to a lofty didactic
poem, is, perhaps, questionable. It presents a fair subject for con-
troversy; and the question is to be determined by the congruity or
incongruity of such a character, with what shall be proved to be the
essential constituents of poetry. But surely the critic, who, pass-
ing by all the opportunities which such a mode of life would present
to such a man; all the advantages of the liberty of nature, of soli-
tude and of solitary thought; all the varieties of places and seasons,
through which his track had lain, with all the varying imagery they
bring with them; and, lastly, all the observations of men,
"Their manners, their enjoyments and pursuits,
Their passions and their feelings,"
which the memory of these yearly journeys must have given and
recalled to such a mind—the critic, I say, who, from the multitude
of possible associations should pass by all these, in order to fix his
attention exclusively on the pin papers, and stay tapes, which might have Lesn amojig the wares of his pack; this critic, in my opinion,
cannot be thought to possess a much higher or much healthier state
of moral feeling, than the Frenchmen above recorded.
31


<page 251>
CHAPTER XXII.
The characteristic defects of Wordsworth's poetry, with the principles from
which the judgment, that they are defects, is deduced—Their proportion to the
beauties—For the greatest part characteristic of his theory only.
I if Mr. Wordsworth have set forth principles of poetry which his
arguments are insufficient to support, let him and those who have
adopted his sentiments be set right by the confutation of those argu-
ments, and by the substitution of more philosophical principles.
And still let the due credit be given to the portion and importance
of the truths which are blended with his theory; truths, the too ex-
clusive attention to which had occasioned its errors, by tempting
him to carry those truths beyond their proper limits. If his mista-
ken theory have at all influenced his poetic compositions, let the ef-
fects be pointed out, and the instances given. But let it likewise
be shown, how far the influence has acted: whether diffusively, or
only by starts; whether the number and importance of the poems
and passages thus infected be great or trifling compared with the
sound portion; and, lastly, whether they are inwoven into the tex-
ture of his works, or are loose and separable. The result of such
a trial would evince, beyond a doubt, what it is high time to announce
decisively and aloud, that the supposed characteristics of Mr. Words-
worth's poetry, whether admired or reprobated; whether they are
simplicity or simpleness; faithful adherence to essential nature, or
wilful selections from human nature of its meanest forms and under
the least attractive associations; are as little the real characteris-
tics of his poetry at large, as of his genius and the constitution of
his mind.
In a comparatively small number of poems, he chose to try an
experiment; and this experiment we will suppose to have failed.
Yet even in these poems it is impossible not to perceive, that the
natural tendency of the poet's mind is to great objects and elevated
conceptions. The poem entitled "Fidelity," is, for the greater
part, written in language as unraised and naked as any perhaps in
the two volumes. Yet take the following stanza, and compare it
with the preceding stanzas of the same poem:

<page 252>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 251
"There sometimes does a leaping fish
Send through the tarn a lonely cheer;
The crags repeat the Raven's croak
In symphony austere;
Thither the rainbow comes—the cloud,
And mists that spread the flying shroud;
And sun-beams: and the sounding blast,
That if it could would hurry past,
But that enormous barrier binds it fust.''
Or compare the four last lines of the concluding stanza with the former half:
"Yet proof was plain, that since the day
On which the traveller thus had died,
The dog had watch'd about the spot,
Or by his master's side: ~
How runirisKd there for such long time
He knows who gave that love sublime,
And gave that strength of feeling, great
Above all human estimate."
Can any candid and intelligent mind hesitate in determining,
which of these best represents the tendency and native character of
the poet's genius? Will he not decide that the one was so written
because the poet would so write, and the other because he could
not so entirely repress the force and grandeur of his mind, but that
he must in some part or other of every composition write otherwise?
In short, that his only disease is the being out of his element; like
the swan, that having amused himself for a while, with crushing the
weeds on the river's bank, soon returns to his own majestic move-
ments on its reflecting and sustaining surface. Let it be observed,
that I am here supposing the imagined judge, to whom I appeal,
to have already decided against the poet's theory, as far as it is dif-
ferent from the principles of the art generally acknowledged.
I cannot here enter into a detailed examination of Mr. Words-
worth's works; but I will attempt to give the main results of my
own judgment, after an acquaintance of many years, and repeated
perusals. And though, to appreciate the defects of a great mind, it
is necessary to understand previously its characteristic excellences,
yet I have already expressed myself with sufficient fulness, to pre-
clude most of the ill effects that might arise from my pursuing a
contrary arrangement. I will therefore commence with what I
deem thejirominent defects of his poems hitherto published.
The first characteristic, though only occasional, defect, which I
appeartdTrJyself to find in those poems is the inconstancy of the

<page 253>

v/.

/■

\
r
r
•
y
■^,
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
style. Under this name I refer to the sudden and unprepared tran-
sitions from lines or sentences of peculiar felicity, (at all events stri-
king and original) to a style, not only unimpassioned but undistin-
guished. He sinks too often and too abruptly to that style which I
should place in the second division of language, dividing it into the
three species; first, that which isjpeculiar topoetry; second,_Jhat
which is only proper in prose; and, third, the neutral, or common
to both. There have been works, such as Cowley's Essay on
Cromwell, in which prose and verse are intermixed (not as in the
Consolation of Boetius or the Argenis of Barclay, by the insertion
of poems supposed to have been spoken or composed on occasions
previously related in prose, but) the poet passing from one to the
other, as the nature of his thoughts or his own feelings dictated.
Yet this mode of composition does not satisfy a cultivated taste.
There is something unpleasant in the being thus obliged tq_aUernate
states of feeling so dissimilar, and this too, in a species of writing,
thepleasure from which is in part derived from the preparation and
rjrejjip^s^j^ejcjaUoj^f^^eader. A portion of that aukwardness
is felt which hangs upon the introduction of songs in our modern
comic operas; and to prevent which the judicious Metastasio (as
to whose exquisite taste there can be no hesitation, whatever doubts
may be entertained as to his poetic genius) uniformly placed the
aria at the end of the scene, at the same time that he almost always
raises and impassions the style of the recitative immediately prece-
ding. Even in real life, the difference is great and evident between
words used as the arbitrary marks of thought, our smooth market-
coin of intercourse with the image and superscription worn out by
currency, and those which convey pictures, either borrowed from
one outward object to enliven and particularize some other; or used
allegorically, to body forth the inward state of the person speaking;
or such as are at least the exponents of his peculiar turn and unu-
sual extent of faculty. So much so indeed, that in the social circles
of private life we often find a striking use of the latter put a stop to
the general flow of conversation, and by the excitement arising from
concentred attention, produce a sort of damp and interruption for
some minutes after. ButjnjhejMirusd of works of literary art, we
..v* prepare, o.ujgetaes £°£JLu^2anj^ajgj^ jind the business of tne wrirter, like that of a painter whose subject requires unusual splendor
and prominence, is so tojraise the lower and neutral tints that what

<page 254>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 253
in a different style would be the commanding colours, are here used
as the means of that gentle gradation requisite in order to produce
the effect of a whole. Where this is not achieved in a poem, the
metre merely reminds the reader of his claims, in order to disap-
point them; and where this defect occurs frequently, his feelings
are alternately startled by anticlimax and hyperclimax.
I refer the reader to the exquisite stanzas cited for another pur-
pose from the blind Highland Boy; and then annex, as being, in
my opinion, instances of this disharmony in style, the two following:
"And one, the rarest, was a shell,
Which he, poor child, had studied well:
The shell of a green turtle, thin
And hollow;—you might sit therein,
It was so wide and deep."
"Our Highland boy oft visited
The house which held this prize, and led
By choice or chance did thither come
One day, when no one was at home,
And found the door unbarred."
Or page 172, vol. I.
"'Tis gone forgotten, let me do
My best. There was a smile or two—
I can remember them, I see
The smiles worth all the world to me.
Dear Baby, I must lay thee down:
Thou troublest me with strange alarms!
Smiles hast thou, sweet ones of thine own;
I cannot keep thee in my arms,
For they confound me: at it it,
I have forgot those smiles of hi*'."
Or page 269, vol. I.
"Thou hast a nest, for thy love and thy rest,
And though little troubled with sloth
Drunken lark! thou would'st be loth
To be such a traveller as I.
Happy, happy liver,
With a tout at strong as a mountain river,
Pouring out praise to th' Almighty Giver.
Joy and jollity be with us both,
Hearing thee or else some other, ,
As merry a brother:
I on the earth will go plodding on
By myself, cheerfully, till the day is done."

<page 255>
254 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
The incongruity which I appear to find in this passage, is that
of the two noble lines in italics with the preceding and following.
So vol. II. page 30.
"Close by .1 pond, upon the further side
He stood alone, a minute's space I guess,
I watched him, he continuing motionless;
To the pool's further margin then I drew;
He being all the while before me in full view."
Compare this with a repetition of the same image, in the next
stanza but two.
"And still ns I drew near with gentle pace,
Beside the little pond or moorish flood,"
Motionless as a cloud the old man stood;
That heareth not the loud winds as they call
And moveth altogether, if it move at all."
Or, lastly, the second of the three following stanzas, compared
both with the first and the third.
"My former thoughts returned, the fear that kills,
And hope that is unwilling to be fed;
Cold, pain, and labor and all fleshly ills;
And mighty poets in their misery dead.
But now, perplex'd by whatthe old man had said,
My question eagerly did I renew,
How is it that you live, and what is it you do 7
He with a smile did then his tale repeat;
And said that gathering leeches far and wide
He travelled: stirring thus about his feet
The waters of the ponds where they abide.
"Once F could meet with them on every side,
"But they have dwindled long by slow decay;
"Yet still I persevere, and find them where I may."
While he was talking thus, the lonely place,
The old man's shape, and speech all troubled me:
In my mind's eye I seemed to see him pace
About the weary moors continually,
Wandering about, alone and silently."
Indeed this fine poem is especially characteristic of the author.
There is scarce a defect or excellence in his writings of which it
would not present a specimen. But it would be unjust not to re-
peat that this defect is only occasional. From a careful reperusal
of the two volumes of poems, I doubt whether the objectionable pas-

<page 256>
BIOGKAPH1A LITEBARIA. 255
sages would amount in the whole to one hundred lines; not the
eighth part of the number of pages. In the Excursion, the feeling
of incongruity is seldom excited by the diction of any passage con-
sidered in itself, but by the sudden superiority of some other pas-
sage formin^the context.
Th^second defect^ could generalizejwtjhjt^
the readeT'wffl'parclon an uncouth and new coined word. There i \ «■»
is. I should say, not seldom a matter-of-[actness incertain poems. .. ,.This may be divided into, first, a laborious minuteness and fidelity in the representation of objects, and their positions, as they appear- "J-* J&tJBbi^
edjo the poet himself; secondly, the insertion of accidental circum- -^^Jt^ -ia^.stances, in order to the full explanation of hjs_Uyinj^haracjers, >S-#iisfeX
their dispositions and actions; which circumstances might be ne-
cessary to establish the probability of a statement in real life, where
nothing is taken for granted by the hearer, but appears superfluous
in poetry, where the reader is willing to believe for his own sake.
To this accidentality I object, as contravening the essence of poet-
ry, which Aristotle pronounces to be srfxSaiirarov xal ipiXojo(pixu<ra-
tov ysvof, the most intense, weighty, and philosophical product of
human art; adding, as the reason, that it is the most catholic and
abstract. The following passage from Davenant's prefatory letter
to Hobbs, well expresses this truth. "When I considered the ac-
tions which I meant to describe (those inferring the persons) I was
again persuaded rather to choose those of a former age, than the
present; and in a century so far removed as might preserve me
from their improper examinations, who know not the requisites of
a poem, nor how much pleasure they lose (and even the pleasures
of heroic poesy are not unprofitable) who take away the liberty of a
poet, and fetter his feet in the shackles of an historian. For why
should a poet doubt in story to mend the intrigues of fortune by
more delightful conveyances of probable fictions, because austere
historians have entered into bond to truth? An obligation which
were in poets as foolish and unnecessary, as is the bondage of false
martyrs, who lie in chains for a mistaken opinion. But by this I
would imply, that truth, narrative and past, is the idol of historians
(who worship a dead thing) and truth operative, and by effects con-
tinually alive, is the mistress of poets, who hath not her existence in
matter, but in reason."
For this minute accuracy in the painting of local imagery, the
lines in the Excursion, p. 96, 97, and 98, may be taken, if not as

<page 257>
256 BIOCRAPHIA LITERARIA.
a striking instance, yet as an illustration of my meaning. It must
be some strong motive (as, for instance, that the description was
necessary to the intelligibility of the tale) which could induce me
to describe in a number of verses what a draftsman could present to
the eye with incomparably greater satisfaction by half adozen strokes
of his pencil, or the painter with as many touches of his brush.
Such descriptions too often occasion in the minds of a reader, who
is determined to understand his author, a feeling of labour, not very
dissimilar to that with which he would construct a diagram, line by
line, for a long geometrical proposition. It seems to be like taking
the pieces of a dissected map out of its box. We first look at one
part, and then at another, then join and dove-tail them; and when
the successive acts of attention have been completed, there is a re-
trogressive effort of mind to behold it as a whole. The Poet should
paint to the imagination, not to the fancy; and I know no happier
case to exemplify the distinction between these two faculties. Mas-
ter-pieces of the former mode of poetic painting abound in the wri-
tings of Milton, ex. gr.
"The fig tree, not that kind for fruit renown'd,
"But such, as at this day to Indians known
"In Malabar or Decan, spreads her arms"Branching so broad and long, that in the ground"The bended twigs take root, and daughters grow"About the mother-tree, a pillar'd shade"High over-arched, and echoing walks between:
■\There oft the Indian Herdsman shunning heat,
'1 Shelters in cool, and tends his pasturing he*ds
"At loop holes cut through thicket shade."
Milton, P. L. 9,1100.
This is creation rather than painting; or if painting,yet such, and
with such co-presence of the whole picture flashed at once upon the
eye, as the sun paints in a camera obscura. But the poet must
likewise understand and command what Bacon calls the vestigia
communia of the senses, the latency of all in each, and more espe-
cially, as by a magical pena duplex, the excitement of vision by
sound, and the exponents of sound: thus, "The echoing walks
between," may be almost said to reverse the fable in tradition of
the head of Memnon, in the Egyptian statue. Such may be deser-
_ vfidly entitled the creative words in the world of imagination.
Th« second'dtvisTOTi^spects an apparent minute adherence to
matter of'fae4m~'character and incidents; a biographical attention

<page 258>
B10GRAPHIA LITEKARIA. 267
U^grobability, and an anxiety of explanation and retrospect. Under
this head, I shall deliver with no feigned diffidence, the results of
my best reflection on the great point of controversy between Mr.
Wordsworth, and his objectors; namely, on the choice of his
characters. I have already declared, and, I trust, justified, my
utter dissent from the mode of argument which his critics have hith-
erto employed. To their question, why did you choose such a
character, or a character from such a rank of life? The Poet might,
in my opinion, fairly retort: why, with the conception of my char-
acter did you make wilful choice of mean or ludicrous associations
not furnished by me, but supplied from your own sickly and fastidi-
ous feelings 1 How was it, indeed, probable, that such arguments
could have any weight with an author, whose plan, whose guiding
principle and main object it was, to attack and subdue that state of
association, which leads us to place the chief value on those things
on which man differs from man, and to forget or disregard the
high dignities which belong to human nature, the sense and the
feeling which may be, and ought to be found in all ranks 1 The
feelings with which, as christians, we contemplate a mixed congre-
gation rising or kneeling before their common Maker, Mr. Words-
worth would have us entertain at all times as men, and as readers;
and by the excitement of this lofty, yet prideless impartiality in poet-
ry, he might hope to have encouraged its continuance in real-life.
The praise of good men be his! In real life, and I trust, even in
my imagination, I honor a virtuous and wise man without reference
to the presence or absence of artificial advantages. Whether in
the person of an armed baron, a laurel'd bard, &c. or of an old ped-
lar or still older leech gatherer, the same qualities of head and heart
must claim the same reverence. And even in poetry I am not con-
scious that I have ever suffered my feelings to be disturbed or of-
fended by any thoughts or images which the poet himself has not
presented.
But yet I object, nevertheless, and for the following reasons:
First,because the object in view, as an immediate object, belongs to ^ .priately, but in my opinion, with far greater probabilityof_ success, 2^u"^€
.the moral philosopher, and would be pursued, not only more appro- 'vJ^*^or^.in sermons or moral essays, than in an elevatecLpoem. It_seejna ^-*y
indeed, to destroy the mam fiuidamental distinction, not onlyjje.- ^A ""**%■
tweefi a poem and prose, but even bttweejj>hiloso^hj and works of \s-"

<page 259>
258
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.

■fy
r
St
<s
fiction, inasmuch as it proposes truth for its immediate object, instead of pleasure. Now, till the blessed time shall come, when
truth itself shall be pleasure, and both shall be so united as to be
distinguishable in words only, not in feeling, it will remain the po-
et's office to proceed upon that state of association which actually
exists as general, instead of attempting first to make it what it
ought to be, and then to let tl'm n^aai-pe fnlJnwT'"T$iit here is un-
fortunately, a small Hysleron-Proteron. For the communication
of pleasure is the introductory means by which alone, the poet must
expect to moralize his readers. Secondly: though I were to ad-
mit, for a moment, this argument to be groundless, yet how is the
moral effect to be produced, by merely attaching the name of some
low profession to powers which are least likely, and to qualities
which are assuredly not more likely, to be found in it? The poet,
speaking in his own person, may at once delight and improve us by
sentiments which teach us the independence of goodness, of wis-
dom, and even of genius, on the favours of fortune. And having
made a due reverence before the throne of Antonine, he may bow
with equal awe before Epictetus among his fellow-slaves—
"and rejoice In the plain presence of his dignity."
Who is not at once delighted and improved, when the poet Words-
worth himself exclaims,
"O many are the poets that are sown
By Nature»; men endowed with highest gifts,
The vision sent, the faculty divine,
Yet wanting the accomplishment of verse.
Not having e'er, as life advanced, been led
By circumstance to take unto the height
The measure of themselves, these favour'd beings All but a scatter'd few, live out their time
Husbanding that which they possess within,
And go to the grave unthought of. Strongest mind
Are often those of whom the noisy world
Hears least."
Excursion, B. I.
To use a colloquial phrase, such sentiments in such language, do
one's heart good; though I for my part, have not the fullest faith
in the truth of the observation. On the contrary, I believe the in-
stances to be exceedingly rare; and should feel almost as strong

<page 260>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 259
an objection to introduce such a character in a poetic fiction, as a
pair of black swans on a lake in a fancy landscape. When I think
how many and how much better books than Homer, or even than
Herodotus, Pindar or Eschylus, could have read, are in the power
of almost every man, in a country where almost every man is in-
structed to read and write; and how restless, how difficultly hid-
den, the powers of genius are; and yet find even in situations the
most favorable, according to Mr. Wordsworth, for the formation of
a pure and poetic language; in situations which ensure familiarity
with the grandest objects of the imagination ; but one Burns among
the shepherds of Scotland, and not a single poet of humble life
among those of English lakes and mountains; I conclude, that
Poetic Genius is not only a very delicate but a veryrareplant.
But be this as it may, the feelings with which
"I think of CHATTERToy, the marvellous boy,
The sleepless soul, that perish'd in his pride:
Of Burns, that walk'd in glory and in joy
Behind his plough upon the mountain-side"—
are widely different from those with which I should read a poem,
where the author, having occasion for the character of a poet and
a philosopher in the fable of his narration, had chosen to make him
a chimney-sweeper; and then, in order to remove all doubts on the
subject, had invented an account of'his birth, parentage, and edu-
cation, with all the strange and fortunate accidents which had con-
curred in making him at once poet, philosopher, and sweep! No-
thing but biography can justify this. If it be admissible even in a
JVbre/, it must be one in the manner of De Foe's, that were meant
to pass for histories, not in the manner of Fielding's; in the life of
Moll Flanders, or Colonel Jack, not in a Tom Jones, or even a
Joseph Andrews. Much less, then, can it be legitimately intro-
duced in a poem, the characters of which, amid the strongest indi-
vidualization, must still remain representative. The precepts of
Horace, on this point, are grounded on the nature both of poetry
and of the human mind. They are not more peremptory than wise
and prudent. For, in the first place, a deviation from them per-
plexes the reader's feelings, and all the circumstances which are
feigned, in order to make such accidents less improbable, divide
and disquiet his faith, rather than aid and support-it. Spite of all
attempts, the fiction will appear, and, unfortunately, not as fictitioust

<page 261>
pot■
860 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.but as false. The reader not only knows that the sentiments and
language are the poet's own, and his own too, in his artificial cha-
racter as poet; but, by the fruitless endeavours to make him think
the contrary, he is not even suffered to forget it. The effect is
similar to that produced by an epic poet, when the fable and the
characters are derived from Scripture history, as in the Messiah of
Klopstock, or in Cumberland's Calvary; and not merely suggested
by it, as in the Paradise Lost of Milton. That illusion, contradistinguished from delusion, that negative faith which simply permits
the images presented to work by their own force, without either
denial or affirmation of their real existence by the judgment, is
rendered impossible by their immediate neighbourhood to words
and facts of known and absolute truth. A faith which transcends
even historic belief, must absolutely put out this mere poetic Anal-
agon of faith, as the summer sun is said to extinguish our household
fires when it shines full upon them. What would otherwise have
been yielded to as pleasing fiction, is repelled as revolting false-
hood. The effect produced in this latter case by the solemn be-
lief of the reader, is in a less degree brought about, in the instances
to which I have been objecting, by the baffled attempts of the au-
thor to make him believe.
Add to all the foregoing, the seeming uselessness both of the
project and of the anecdotes from which it is to derive support. Is
there one word, for instance, attributed to the pedlar in the Excur-
sion, characteristic of a pedlar? One sentiment that might not
more plausibly, even without the aid of any previous explanation,
have proceeded from any wise and beneficent old man, of a rank
or profession in which the language of learning and refinement are
natural, and to be expected 1 Need the rank have been at all par-
ticularized, where nothing follows which the knowledge of that
rank is to explain or illustrate? When, on the contrary, this in-
formation renders the man's language, feelings, sentiments, and
information, a riddle which must itself be solved by episodes of
anecdote? Finally, when this, and this alone, could have induced
a genuine poet to inweave in a poem of the loftiest style, and on
subjects the loftiest and of most universal interest, such minute
matters of fact, (not unlike those furnished for the obituary of a
magazine by the friends of some obscure ornament of society lately
deceased in some obscure town, as,


<page 262>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 261
"Among the hills of Athol he was born.
There, on a small hereditary farm, An unproductive slip of rugged ground,
His father dwelt, and died, in poverty;
While he, whose lowly fortune I retrace,
The youngest of three sons, was yet a babe,
A little one—unconscious of their loss.
But 'ere he had outgrown his infant days,
His widow'd mother, for a second mate,
Espoused the teacher of the Village School;
Who on her offspring zealously bestowed
Needful instruction."
"From his sixth year, the boy of whom I speak,
In summer, tended cattle on the hills;
But through the inclement and the perilous days
Of long-continuing winter, he repaired
To his step-father's school."—&c.
For all the admirable passages interposed in this narration might, 'MA? A-cJtwith trifling alterations, have been far more appropriately, and with W*»t£/ ..-cJ?
faTeireater verisimilitude, told of a poet in the character of a poet: »»*- ~p\f*
ancFwithout incurring another defect which I shall now mention,/!^,^ ^.
and a sufficient illustration of which will have been here anticipated. < •?-£f j„
/Third^--an undue predilection for the dramatic ^fo^^in^certma \^>o i^j^^^a
poems, from which one or other of two evils result. Either the
thoughts and diction are different from that of the poet, and then
there arises an incongruity of style; or they are the same and in-
distinguishable, and then it presents a species of ventriloquism,
where two are represented as talking, while, in truth, one man only
speaks.
The^fdurTli' class of defects is closely connected with the former;
but yet are such as arise likewise from an intensity of feeling disproportionate to such knowledge and value of the objects described,
as can be fairly anticipated of men in general, even of the most
cultivated classes; and with which, therefore, few only, and those
few particularly circumstanced, can be supposed to sympathise.
In this class I comprise occasional prolixity, repetition, an.d gn.^dr
dyingjnstead of progression of thought. As instances, see pages
27, 28, and 62, of the Poems, Vol. I., and the first eighty lines of
the Sixth Book of the Excursion.
"S&bV^nd last: thoughts and images too great for the subject. This is an approximation to what might be called mental bombast, as distinguished from verbal; for, as in the latter, there is a dispro<

i

<page 263>
269 MOGHAPHIA LITERARIA.
portion of the expressions to the thoughts, so, in this, there is a
disproportion of thought to the circumstance and occasion. This,
by-the-by, is a fault of which none but a man of genius is capable.
It is the aukwardness and strength of Hercules, with the distaff of
Omphale.
It is a well-known fact, that bright colours in motion both make
and leave the strongest impressions on the eye. Nothing is more
likely, too, than that a vivid image, or visual spectrum, thus origi-
nated, may become the link of association in recalling the feelings
and images that had accompanied the original impression. But,
if we describe this in such lines as
"They flash upon that inward eye,
Which is the bliss of solitude!"
in what words shall we describe the joy of retrospection, when the
images and virtuous actions of a whole well-spent life, pass before
that conscience which is, indeed, the inward eye; which is, in-
deed, the " bliss of soliltide V Assuredly we seem to sink most
abruptly, not to say burlesquely, and almost as in a medly from this
couplet to—
"And then my heart with pleasure fills,
And dances with the daffodils." Vol. i. p. 320.
The second instance is from Vol. II., page 12, where the poet,
having gone out for a day's tour of pleasure, meets, early in the
morning, with a knot of gypsies, who had pitched their blanket
tents and straw-beds, together with their children and asses, in
some field by the road-side. At the close of the day, on his re-
turn, our tourist found them in the same place. "Twelve hours,"
says he,
"Twelve hours, twelve bounteous hours, are gone while I
Have been a traveller under open sky,
Much witnessing of change and cheer,
Yet as I left I find them here!"
Whereat the poet, without seeming to reflect that the poor tawny wanderers might probably have been tramping, for weeks together,
through road, lane, over moor and mountain, and, consequently,
must have been right glad to rest themselves, their children, and
cattle, for one whole day; and overlooking the obvious truth, that

<page 264>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 263
such repose might be quite as necessary for them as a walk of the
same continuance was pleasing or healthful for the more fortunate
poet; expresses his indignation in a series of lines, the diction and
imagery of which would have been rather above than below the
mark, had they been applied to the immense empire of China, im-
progressive for thirty centuries:
"The weary Sun betook himself to rest,
Then issued Vesper from the fulgent west,
Outshining, like a visible God,
The glorious path in which he trod!
And now ascending, after one dark hour,
And one night's diminution of her power,
Behold the mighty Moon! this way
She looks, as if at them—but they
Regard not her—Oh, better-wrong and strife,
Better vain deeds or evil, than such life!
The.silent Heavens have goings on:
The STARShave tasks—but these have none!"
The last instance of this defect, (for I know no other than these
already cited,) is from the Ode, page 351, Vol. II., where, speak-
ing of a child, "a six year's darling of a pigmy size," he thus ad-
dresses him:
"Thou best philosopher, who yet dost keep
Thy heritage! Thou eye among the blind,
That, deaf and silent, read'st the eternal deep,
Haunted for ever by the Eternal Mind—
Mighty Prophet! Seer blest!
On whom those truths do rest,
Which we are toiling all our lives to find!
Thou, over whom thy immortality
Broods like the day, a master o'er the slave;
A presence that is not to be put by!"
Now here, not to stop at the daring spirit of metaphor which
connects the epithets "deaf and silent," with the apostrophized
eye: or (if we are to refer it to the preceding word, philosopher,)
the faulty and equivocal syntax of the passage; and without exam- ■ining the propriety of making a "master brood o'er a slave," or • +*the day brood at all; we will merely ask, what does all this mean? r3^7 ^»v'*In what sense is a child of that age a philosopher? In what sense does he read " the~eternai deepTT"In"what sense is he declared to be "for ever haunted by the Supreme Being?" or so inspired as

<page 265>
264 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
to deserve the splendid titles of a mighty prophet, a blessed seer?
By reflection? by knowledge? by conscious intuition? or by any
form or modification of consciousness? These would be tidings
indeed; but such as would pre-suppose an immediate revelation to
the inspired communicator, and require miracles to authenticate
his inspiration. Children, at this age, give us no such information
of themselves; and at what time were we dipt in the Lethe, which
has produced such utter oblivion of a state so godlike? There
are many of us that still possess some remembrances, more or less
distinct, respecting themselves at six years old ; pity that the worth-
less straws only should float, while treasures, compared with which
all the mines of Golconda and Mexico were but straws, should be
absorbed by some unknown gulf into some unknown abyss.
But if this be too wild and exorbitant to be suspected as having
been the poet's meaning; if these mysterious gifts, faculties, and
operations, are not accompanied with consciousness, who else is
conscious of them? or how can it be called the child, if it be no
part of the child's conscious being? For aught I know, the think-
ing Spirit within me may be substantially one with the principle of
life, and of vital operation. For aught I know, it may be employed
as a secondary agent in the marvellous organization and organic
movements of my body. But, surely, it would be strange language
to say, that /construct my heart! or that J propel the finer influ-
ences through my nerves! or that /compress my brain, and draw
the curtains of sleep round my own eyes! Spinoza and Behmen
were, on different systems, both Pantheists; and among the an-
cients there were philosophers, teachers of the EN KAIIIAN, who
not only taught that God was All, but that this All constituted God.
Yet not even these would confound the part, as a part with the
whole, as the whole. Nay, in no system is the distinction between
the individual and God, between the Modification and the one only
Substance, more sharply drawn, than in that of Spinoza. Jacobi,
indeed, relates of Lessing, that after a conversation with him at
the house of the poet Gleim, (the Tyrtseus and Anacreon of the
German Parnassus,) in which conversation L. had avowed private-
ly to Jacobi his reluctance to admit any personal existence of the
Supreme Being, or the possibility of personality except in a finite
Intellect; and while they were sitting at table, a shower of rain
came on unexpectedly. Gleim expressed his regret at the circum-

<page 266>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERAKIA. 265
stance, because they had meant to drink their wine in the garden;
upon which Leasing, in one of his half-earnest, half-joking moods,
nodded to Jacobi, and said, "It is I, perhaps, that am doing that,"
i. e. raining! and J. answered, " or perhaps I." Gleim content-
ed himself with staring at them both, without asking for any ex-
planation.
So with regard to this passage. In what sense can the magnifi-
cent attributes, above quoted, be appropriated to a child, which
would not make them equally suitable to a bee, or a dog, or a field
of com t or even to a ship, or to the wind and waves that propel it?
The omnipresent Spirit works equally in them, as in the child; and
the child is equally unconscious of it as they. It cannot surely be,
that the four lines, immediately following, are to contain the ex-
planation? . .
"To whom the grave
Is but a lonely bed without the sense or sight
Of day, or the warm light;
A place of thought where we in waiting lie."'
Surely, it cannot be that this wonder-rousing apostrophe is but a
comment on the little poem of "We are Seven 1" that the whole
meaning of the passage is reducible to the assertion, that a child,
who, by the bye, at six years old would have been better instructed
in most christian families, has no other notion of death than that of
lying in a dark, cold place 1 And still, I hope, not as in a place of
thought! not the frightful notion of lying awake in his grave! The
analogy between death and sleep is too simple, too natural, to ren-
der so horrid a belief possible for children; even had they not been
in the habit, as all christian children are, of hearing the latter term
used to express the former. But if the child's belief be only, that
"he is not dead, but sleepeth^'wherein does it differ from that of
his father and mother, or any other adult and instructed person?
To form an idea of a thing's becoming nothing, or of nothing be-
coming a thing, is impossible to all finite beings alike, of whatever
age, and however educated or uneducated. TJmsj^isjvhh splen-
did paradoxes in general. If the wo^s^r^akeinjnj^Le^ommon
sense, they convey an absurdjty_:_and if> in contempt of dictionaries
and_custom, they_are so interpreted as to avoid the absurdity, the
meaning dwindles into spmejjald truism. Thus you must at once

33

<page 267>
IIIOGRAI'IUA L1TERARIA.
understand the words contrary to their common import, in order to
arrive at any sense; and according to their common import, if you
are to receive from them any feeling of sublimity or admiration.
Though the instances of this defect in Mr. Wordsworth's poems
are so few, that for themselves it would have been scarcely just to
attract the reader's attention toward them; yet I have dwelt on it,
and perhaps the more for this very reason. For being so very
few, they cannot sensibly detract from the reputation of an author,
who is even characterized by the number of profound truths in his
writings, which will stand the severest analysis; and yet, few as
they are, they are exactly those passages which his blind admirers
would be most likely, and best able, to imitate. But Words-
worth, where he is indeed Wordsworth, may be mimicked by
copyists, he may be plundered by plagiarists; but he cannot be
imitated, except by those who are not born to be imitators. For
without his depth of feeling and his imaginative power, his sense
would want its vital warmth and peculiarity; and without his strong
sense, his mysticism would become sickly—mere fog and dimness!
)(/J ^To these defects, which, as appears by the extracts, are only
fiOX*'**^ occasional, I may oppose, with far less fear of encountering the
dissent of any candid and intelligent readjej^the following (for the
most part correspondent) excellences.^Fjjst^an austere purity of
fT JL.'language, both grammatically and logically; in short, a perfect ap-
propriateness of the words to the meaning. Of how high value I
deem this, and how particularly estimable I hold the example at
the present day, has been already stated; and in part, too, the rea-
sons on which I ground both the moral and intellectual importance
of habituating ourselves to a strict accuracy of expression. It is
noticeable, how limited an acquaintance with the masterpieces of
art will suffice to form a correct, and even a sensitive taste, where
none but masterpieces have been seen and admired; while, on the
other hand, the most correct notions, and the widest acquaintance
with the works of excellence of all ages and countries, will not per-
fectly secure us against the contagious familiarity with the far more
numerous offspring of tastelessness or of a perverted taste. If this
be the case, as it notoriously is, with the arts of music and paint-
ing, much more difficult will it be to avoid the infection of multi-
plied and daily examples in the practice of an art, which uses
words, and words only, as its instruments. In poetry, in which


<page 268>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 267
every line, every phrase, may pass the ordeal of deliberation and
deliberate choice, it is possible, and barely possible, to attain that
ultimatum which I have ventured to propose as the infallible test
of a blameless style: namely, its untranslatableness in words of the
same language, without injury to the meaning. Be it observed,
however, that I include in the meaning of a word, not only its cor-
respondent object, but likewise all the associations which it recalls.
For language is framed to convey not the object alone, but like-
wise the character, mood, and intentions of the person who is repre-
senting it. In poetry it is practicable to preserve the diction, un-
corrupted by the affectations and misappropriations, which promis-
cuous authorship, and reading not promiscuous, only because it is
disproportionally most conversant with the compositions of the day,
have rendered general. Yet, even to the poet, composing in his
own province, it is an arduous work; and as the result and pledge
of a watchful good sense, of fine and luminous distinction, and of
complete self-possession, may justly claim all the honour which
belongs to an attainment equally difficult and valuable, and the more
valuable for being rare. It is at all times the proper food of the
understanding; but, in an age of corrupt eloquence, it is both food
and antidote.
In prose, I doubt whether it be even possible to preserve our
style, wholly unalloyed by the vicious phraseology which meets us
every where, from the sermon to the newspaper, from the harangue
of the legislator to the speech from the convivial chair, announcing «-*—-a toast or sentiment. Our chains rattle, even while we are com- /C ^o^6"--plaining of them. The poems of Boetius rise high in our estima-
tion when we compare them with those of his contemporaries, as
Sidonius, Apollinaris, &c. They might even be referred to a purer
age, but that the prose in which they are set, as jewels in a crown of lead or iron, betrays the true age of the writer. Much, howev- j^~^-cX^U^rer, may be effected by education. I believe, not only from grounds
of reason, but from having, in great measure, assured myself of the
fact by actual though limited experience, that, to a youth, led from
his first boyhood to investigate the meaning of every word, and the
reason of its choice and position, logic presents itself as an old
acquaintance under new names.
On some future occasion more especially demanding such dis-
quisition, I shall attempt to prove the close connection between


<page 269>
268 JJIOGIUPHIA I.ITERARIA.
veracity and habits of mental accuracy; the beneficial after-effects
of verbal precision in the preclusion of fanaticism, which masters
the feelings more especially by indistinct watch-words ; and to dis-
play the advantages which language alone, at least which language
with incomparably greater ease and certainty than any other means,
presents to the instructor of impressing modes of intellectual ener-
gy so constantly, so imperceptibly, and, as it were, by such ele-
ments and atoms as to secure in due time the formation of a sec-
ond nature. When we reflect, that the cultivation of the judgment
is a positive command of the moral law, since the reason can give
the principle alone, and the conscience bears witness only to the
motive, while the application and effects must depend on the judg-
ment; when we consider, that the greater part of our success and
comfort in life depends on distinguishing the similar from the same,
that which is peculiar in each thing from that which it has in com-
mon with others, so as still to select the most probable, instead of
the merely possible or positively unfit, we shall learn to value
earnestly, and with a practical seriousness, a mean already pre-
pared for us by nature and society, of teaching the young mind to
think well and wisely by the same unremembered process, and
with the same never forgotten results, as those by which it is taught
to speak and converse. Now, how much warmer the interest,
how much more genial the feelings of reality and practicability,
and thence how much stronger the impulses to imitation are, which
a contemporary writer, and especially a contemporary poet, excites
in youth and commencing manhood, has been treated of in the ear-
lier pages of these sketches. I have only to add, that all the praise
which is due to the exertion of such influence for a purpose so im-
portant, joined with that which must be claimed for the infrequency
of the same excellence in the same perfection, belongs in full right
to Mr. Wordsworth. I am far, however, from denying that we
have poets whose general style possesses the same excellence, as
Mr. Moore, Lord Byron, Mr. Bowles, and, in all his later and
more important works, our laurel-honouring Laureate. But there
are none, in whose works I do not appear to myself to find more
exceptions than in those of Wordsworth. Quotations or speci-
mens would here be wholly out of place, and must be left for the
critic who doubts and would invalidate the justice of this eulogy so
applied. . v


<page 270>
BIOGRAPHlA LITERARIA. 269
TheJwcflnd^hwa^Misti^jexeellence of_ Mr. W.'s works iSjja
correspondent weight and sanity of the thoughts and sentiments—
mon+jiot from books, but from the poet's own meditative observa-
tion. They are fresh, and have the dew upon them. His muse,
at least when in her strength of wing, and when she hovers aloft in
her proper element,
Makes audible a linked lay of truth,
Of truth profound a sweet continuous lay,
Not learnt, but native, her own natural notes! S. T. C.
Even throughout his smaller poems there is scarcely one which
is not rendered valuable by some just and original reflection.
See page 26, vol. 2d; or the two following passages in one of
his humblest compositions:
"O Reader! had you in your mind
Such stores as silent thought can bring,
O gentle Reader! you would find
A tale in every thing."
."'«.
and V. ■«&:.'>
"I have heard of hearts unkind, kind deeds
With coldness still returning:
Alas! the gratitude of men
Has oftener left me mourning."
or in a still higher strain the six beautiful quatrains, page 134:
"Thus fares it still in our decay:
And yet the wiser mind
Mourns less for what age takes away
Than what it leaves behind.
The Blackbird in the summer trees,
The lark upon the hill,
Let loose their carols when they please:
Are quiet when they will.
With nature never do they wage
A foolish strife; they see
A happy youth, and their old age
Is beautiful and free!
But we are pressed by heavy laws;
And often, glad no more.
We wear a face of joy, because
We have been glad of yore.
)^U^^

<page 271>
270 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
If there is one who need bemoan
His kindred laid in earth,
The household hearts that were his own,
It is the man of mirth.
My days, my Friend, are almost gone,
My life has been approved,
And many love me; but by none
Am I enough beloved."
or the sonnet on Bonaparte, page 202, vol. 2; or finally, (for a
volume would scarce suffice to exhaust the instances,) the last
stanza of the poem on the withered Celandine, vol. 2, p. 212.
To be a prodigal's favourite—then, worse truth,
A miser's pensioner—behold our lot!
Oh man! that from thy fair and shining youth Age might but take the things youth needed not."
Both in respect of this and of the former excellence, Mr. Words-
Hiworth strikingly resembles Samuel Daniel, one of the golden wri-
, d. jfters of our golden Elizabethian age, now most causelessly neglect-
• jr y\ed; Samuel Daniel, whose diction bears no mark of time, no_dis-
r'V V »|/ U_nc*'on "^S6' wh'ch nas been, and as long as our language shall
»; \\-f last^will be, so far the language of the to-day and for ever, as that
. jjr (fit is more intelligible to us than the transitory fashions of our own
i qMt particular age. A similar praise is due to his sentiments. No
Qy frequency of perusal can deprive them of their freshness. For though they are brought into the full day-light of every reader's
comprehension, yet are they drawn up from depths which few in
any age are privileged to visit, into which few in any age have
courage or inclination to descend. IfMr, W"rHswnrth is n"t pqual-
.>>? v*'**ly with Daniel, alike intelligibLeJ.9.. all readers of average underr
■^*A'**r" standing^ in all passages of Jlisjworks, the comparative difficulty
, y' ]*sdoes not arisejrom thfi„^r£atei^mpjMity of the ore, but fromjhe
r uJ■^" riatuYeTfnd uses_of the metal,■, A poem is not necessarily obscure,
because it does not aim to be popular. It is enough, if a work be
perspicuous to those for whom it is written, and
"Fit audience find, though few."
To the " Ode on the intimation of immortality, from recollections
of early childhood," the poet might have prefixed the lines which
Dante addresses to one of his own Canzoni—

<page 272>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 2T1
"Canzon, io credo, che saranno radi f
Che tua ragione intendan bene:
Tanto lor sei faticoso ed alto."
"O lyric song, there will be few, think I,
Who may thy import understand aright:
Thou art for them so arduous and so high!"
But the ode was intended for such readers only as had been ac-
customed to watch the flux and reflux of their inmost nature, to
venture at times into the twilight realms of consciousness, and to
feel a'deep interest in modes of inmost being, to which they know
that the attributes of time and space are inapplicable and alien, but
which yet cannot be conveyed, save in symbols of time and space.
For such readers the sense is sufficiently plain, and they will be as
little disposed to charge Mr. Wordsworth with believing the plato-
nic pre-existence in the ordinary interpretation of the words, as I am
to believe that Plato himself ever meant or taught it.
IloXXa 01 i3#' ajocw-
voj <Wa /3^X»]
"EvSov svti (papsVpaj
#wvavra gvvsroigtv Sg
A£ TO tf«V Sf>lM)v£o)S
Xari^si. 2o(pog 6 #oX-
Xa si(5os <pua.
Ma&ovrss Si, Xa/?noi
nayyXwsji'o^, xo'paxsg us
"Ax^avra yajusrov
Aios irpoj opviSa Ssiov.
C■^'hird^ar^„wJ^sia„h_e^oare_farl■above DanieU the sinewy
strength and originality of single lines and paragraphs : the frequent
curiosa felicitas of his diction, of which I need not here give speci-
mens, having anticipated themj£j^re^ceding^pajge.^.This beauty,
and as eminently characteristic of Wordsworth's poetry, his rudest
assailants have felt themselves compelled to acknowledge and
admire. ^
c"T|purJtKi-1the perfect truth of nature in his images and descrjo- J^J&-*^~ ^*"
tions^a&Jatej.Jlmmediately from nature, and proving a long ajid" ^ Q genial intimacy witjjthe, very spirit which gives the physiognomic expression to all the works of nature. Like a green field reflected
~4±
'.','. r*~

<page 273>
272 BIOGRAFHIA I.ITERARIA.
in a calm and perfectly transparent lake, the image is distinguished
from the reality only by its greater softness and lustre. Like the
moisture or the polish on a pebble, genius neither distorts nor false-
colours its objects; but, on the contrary, brings out many a vein
and many a tint, which escape the eye of common observation, thus
raising to the rank of gems what had been often kicked away by
the hurrying foot of the traveller on the dusty high road of custom.
Let me refer to the whole description of skating, vol. I. page
42 to 47, especially to the lines,
"So through the darkness and the cold we flew,
And not a voice was idle: with the din
Meanwhile the precipices rang aloud;
The leafless trees and every icy crag
Tinkled like iron; while the distant hills
Into the tumult sent an alien sound
Of melancholy, not unnoticed, while the stars
Eastward were sparkling clear, and in the west
The orange sky of evening died away."
Or to the poem on the green linnet, vol. I. p. 244. What can
be more accurate, yet more lovely, than the two concluding stanzas?
"Upon yon tuft of hazel trees,
That twinkle to the gusty breeze,
Behold him perched in-ecstacies,
Yet seeming still to hover;
There! where the flutter of his wings
Upon his back and body flings
Shadows and sunny glimmerings
That cover him all over.
While thus before my eyes he gleams,
A brother of the leaves he seems;
When in a moment forth he teems
His little song in gushes:
As if it pleased him to disdain
And mock the form when he did feign
While he was dancing with the train
Of leaves among the bushes."
Or the description of the blue cap, and of the noontide silence,
p. 284; or the poem to the cuckoo, p. 299; or, lastly, though I
might multiply the references to ten times the number, to the poem
so completely Wordsworth's, commencing,
"Three years she grew in sun and shower," &c.

<page 274>
M0GRAPHIA LITERARIA.
273
s Tiftfe-^ meditative pathos, a union of deep and subtle thought with sensibility; a sympathy with manai^maTrf^th^ympartSJ in-
deed of a contemplator,/rather jhan a fellow sufferejcdioyfcjnaate,
(sj^*^J»audj)articeps^ ftoni whosaarifisf
no difference of rank conceals the sameness of the nature; no in-
juries of wind or weather, of toil, nr nvnn nf iirnnnnre, whoMj^Hriguise the human face divine. The superscription and the image of
the Creator still remain legible to him under the dark lines with which
guilt or calamity had cancelled or cross-barred it. Herejw man
and the poet lose and find themselves .ineadi_other, the one as glori-
fied, the latter as substantiated. In this mild and philosophic pathos,
Wordsworth appears to me without a compeer. Such he is: so
he writes. See vol. I. page 134 to 136, or that most affecting
composition, the "Affliction of Margaret of ," page 165
to 168, which no mother, and, if I may judge by my own experi-
ence, no parent can read without a tear. Or turn to that genuine
lyric, in the former edition, entitled, the' Mad Mother," page 174
to 178, of which I oannot refrain from quoting two of the stanzas,
both of them for their pathos, and the former for the fine transition
in the two concluding lines of the stanza, so expressive of that de-
ranged state in which, fronir-the increased sensibility, the sufferer's
attention is abruptly drawn off by every trifle, and in the same in-
stant plucked back again by the one despotic thought, and bringing
home with it, by the blending, fusing power of Imagination and
Passion, the alien object to which it had been so abruptly diverted,
no longer an alien, but an ally and an inmate.
"tut.
■fy*^■ J
-"Suck, little babe, oh suck again!It cools my blood; it cools my brain:Thy lips, I feel them, baby! they
Draw from my heart the pain away.
Oh! press me with thy little hand;
It loosens something at my chest;About that tight and deadly band
I feel thy little fingers prest.
The breeze, I see, is in the tree;It comes to cool my babe and me.""Thy father cares not for my breast,
'Tis thine, sweet baby, there to rest,
'Tis all thine own 1—and if its hue
Be changed, that was so fair to view,'
'Tis fair enough for thee, my dove!
34

<page 275>
{274 BIOGRAPHIA L1TEHARIA.
My beauty, little child, is flown;
But thou wilt live with me in love;
And what if my poor cheek be brown?
'Tis well for me thou can'st not see
How pale and wan it else would be."
Last, and pre-eminently,.! challenge for thigjoet the gift of Im-
Ction in the highest aniTstnctestj^ense of the word. In the
play of Fancy, Wordsworth, to my feelings, is not always graceful,
and sometimes recondite. The likeness is occasionally too strange,
or demands too peculiar a point of view, or is such as appears the
creature of predetermined research, rather than spontaneous pre-
sentation. Indeed, his fancy seldom displays itself, as mere and
unmodified fancy. But in imaginative power, he stands nearest
of all modern writers to Shakspeare and Milton: and yet in a kind
perfectly unborrowed and his own. To employ his own words,
which are at once an instance and an illustration, he does indeed
to all thoughts and to all objects—
"i add the gleam,
The light that never was on sea or land,
The consecration, and the poet's dream."
I shall select a few examples as most obviously manifesting this
faculty; but if I should ever be fortunate enough to render my
analysis of imagination, its origin and characters, thoroughly intel-
ligible to the reader, he will scarcely open on a page of this poet's
works, without recognising, more or less, the presence and the in-
fluences of this faculty.
From the poem on the Yew Trees, vol. I. pages 303, 304,
"But worthier still of note
Are those fraternal four of Borrowdale,
Joined in one solemn and capacious grove:
Huge trunks!—and each particular trunk a growth
Of intertwisted fibres serpentine
Up-coiling, and inveterately oonvolved—
Not uninformed with phantasy, and looks
That threaten the profane;—a pillared shade,
Upon whose grassless floor of red-brown hue,
By sheddings from the pinal umbrage tinged
Perennially—beneath whose sable roof
Of boughs, as if for festal purpose decked
With unrejoicing berries, ghostly shapes
May meet at noontide—Fear and trembling Hope,
Silence and Foresight—Death, the skeleton,

<page 276>
BIOGRAPIIIA LITERARIA. 275
And Time, the shadow—there to celebrate,
As in a natural temple scattered o'er
With altars undisturbed of mossy stone,
United worship; or in mute repose
To lie, and listen to the mountain flood
Murmuring from Glanamara's inmost caves."
The effect of the old man's figure in the poem of Resignation
and Independence, vol. II. page 33.
"While he was talking thus, the lonely place,
The old man's shape, and speech, all troubled me:
In my mind's eye I seemed to see him pace
About the weary moors continually,
Wandering about alone and silently."
Or *e 8th, 9th, 19th, 26th, 31st and 33d, in the collection of
miscellaneous sonnets—the sonnet on the subjugation of Switzer-
land, page 210, or the last ode from which I especially select the
two following stanzas or paragraphs, page 349 to 350.
"Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting:
The soul that rises with us, our life's star,
Hath had elsewhere its setting, <
And cometh from afar.
Not in entire forgetfulness,
And not in utter nakedness,
But trailing clouds of glory do we come
From God who is our home i
Heaven lies about us in our infancy!
Shades of the prison-house begin to close
Upon the growing boy;
But he beholds the light, and whence it flows;
He sees it in his joy!
The youth who daily further from the east
Must travel, still is nature's priest,
And by the vision splendid
Is on his way attended;
At length the man perceives it die away,
And fade into the light of common day."
And page 352 to 354 of the same ode.
"O joy that in our embers
Is something that doth live,
That nature yet remembers
What was so fugitive!
The thought of our past years in me doth breed
Perpetual benedictions: not indeed
For that which is most worthy to be blest—

<page 277>
276
BIOGRAPHIA LITEHARIA;
/
Delight and liberty the simple creed
Of childhood, whether busy or at rest,
With new-fledged hope still fluttering in his breast:—
Not for these I raise
The song of thanks and praise;
But for those obstinate questionings
Of sense and outward things,
Fallings from us, vanishings;
Blank misgivings of a creature
Moving about in worlds not realized,
High instincts, before which our mortal nature
Did tremble like a guilty thing surprised!
But for those first affections,
Those shadowy recollections,
Which, be they what they may,
Are yet the fountain light of all our day,
Are yet a master light of all our seeing;
Uphold us—cherish—and have power to make
Our noisy years seem moments in the being
Of the eternal silence; truths that wake
To perish never:
Which neither listlessness, nor mad endeavour,
Nor man nor boy, Nor all that is at enmity with joy,
Can utterly abolish or destroy!
Hence, in a season of calm weather,
Though inland far we be,
Our souls have sight of that immortal sea
Which brought us hither,
Can in a moment travel thither—
And see the children sport upon the shore,
And hear the mighty waters rolling evermore."

-
•
.
!
'And since it would be unfair to conclude with an extract, which,
though highly characteristic, must yet, from the nature of the
thoughts and the subject, be interesting, or perhaps intelligible, to
but a limited number of readers, I will add from the poet's last
published work a passage equally Wordsworthian; of the beauty
of which, and of the imaginative power displayed therein, there can
be but one opinion and one feeling. See White Doe, page 5.
"Fast the church-yard fills; anon
Look again and they are gone;
The cluster round the porch, and the folk
Who sate in the shade of the prior's oak!
And scarcely have they disappear'd
Ere the prelusive hymn is heard:—
With one consent the people rejoice, Filling the church with a lofty voice!

<page 278>
BTOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 277
They sing a service which they feel, For'tis the sun-rise of their zeal, And faith and hope are in their prime In great Eliza's golden time." A moment ends the fervent din, And all is hushed without and within;For though the priest more tranquilly Recites the holy liturgy, The only voice which you can hear Is the river murmuring near. When soft!—the dusky trees between, And down the path through the open green, Where is no living thing to be seen;And through yon gateway, where is found, Beneath the arch with ivy bound, Free entrance to the church-yard ground And right across the verdant sod Towards the very house of God;Comes gliding in with lovely gleam, Comes gliding in serene and slow, Soft and silent as a dream, A solitary doe!White she is as lily of June, And beauteous as the silver moon When out of sight the clouds are driven, And she is left alone in heaven! , .[■Or like a ship some gentle day In sunshine sailing far away— A glittering ship that hath the plain Of ocean for her own domain.
What harmonious pensive changes
Wait upon her as she ranges
Round and round this pile of state,
Overthrown and desolate!
Now a step or two her way
Is through space of open day,
Where the enamoured sunny light
Brightens her that was so bright:
Now doth a delicate shadow fall,
Falls upon her like a breath
From some lofty arch or wall,
As she passes underneath.
The following analogy will, I am apprehensive, appear dim and
fantastic, but in reading Bartram's Travels, I could not help tran-
scribing the following lines as a sort of allegory, or connected simi-
le and metaphor of Wordsworth's intellect and genius. "The soil
is a deep, rich, dark mould, on a deep stratum of tenacious clay;
and that on a foundation of rocks, which often break through both

<page 279>
278 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
strata, lifting their back above the surface. The trees which chief-
ly grow here are the gigantic black oak; magnolia' magnifloria;
fraximus excelsior; platane; and a few stately tulip trees." What
Mr. Wordsworth will produce, it is not for me to prophecy; but I
could pronounce with the liveliest convictions what he is capable
of producing. It is the First Genuine Philosophic Poem.
The preceding criticism will not, I'&M "aware, avail to overcome
the prejudices of those who have made it a business to attack and
ridicule Mr. Wordsworth's compositions.
Truth and prudence might be imaged as concentric circles. The
poet may perhaps have passed beyond the latter, but he has con-
fined himself far within the bounds of the former, in designating
these critics as too petulant to be passive to a genuine poet, and
too feeble to grapple with him;—" men of palsied imaginations, in
whose minds all healthy action is languid; who, therefore, feel as
the many direct them, or with the many are greedy after vicious
provocatives."
Let not Mr. Wordsworth be charged with having expressed him-
self too indignantly, till the wantonness and the systematic and
malignant perseverance of the aggressions have been taken into
fair consideration. I myself heard the commander in chief of this
unmanly warfare make a boast of his private admiration of
Wordsworth's genius. I have heard him declare, that whoever
came into his room would probably find the Lyrical Ballads lying
open on his table, and that (speaking exclusively of those written
by Mr. Wordsworth himself) he could nearly repeat the whole of
them by heart. But a Review, in order to be a saleable article,
must be personal, sharp, and pointed; and, since then, the Poet has
made himself, and with himself all who were, or were supposed to
be, his friends and admirers, the object of the critic's revenge—
how? by having spoken of a work so conducted in the terms which
it deserved! I once heard a clergyman in boots and buckskin
avow, that he would cheat his own father in a horse. A moral
system of a similar nature seems to have been adopted by too many
anonymous critics. As we used to say at school, in reviewing,
they make being rogues: and he, who complains, is to be laughed
at for his ignorance of the game. With the pen out of their hand
they are honourable men. They exert, indeed, power (which is to
that of the injured party who should attempt to expose their glaring


<page 280>
B10GRAPHIA LITEKAIUA. 279
perversions and mis-statements, as twenty to one) to write down,
and (where the author's circumstances permit) to impoverish the
man, whose learning and genius they themselves in private have
repeatedly admitted. They knowingly strive to make it impossible
for the man even to publish * any future work, without exposing
himself to all the wretchedness of debt and embarrassment. But
this is all in their vocation, and bating what they do in their voca-
tion, "who can say that black is the white of their eye?"
So much for the detractors from Wordsworth's merits. On
the other hand, much as I might wish for their fuller sympathy, I
dare not flatter myself, that the freedom with which I have declared
my opinions concerning both his theory and his defects, most of
which are more or less connected with his theory either as cause or
effect, will be satisfactory or pleasing to all the poet's admirers and
advocates. More indiscriminate than mine their admiration may
be; deeper and more sincere it cannot be. But I have advanced
no opinion either for praise or censure, other than as texts intro-
ductory to the reasons which compel me to form it. Above all, I
was fully convinced that such a criticism was not only wanted, but
that, if executed with adequate ability, it must conduce in no mean
degree to Mr. Wordsworth's reputation. His fame belongs to
another age, and can neither be accelerated or retarded. How
small the proportion of the defects are to the beauties, I have repeatedly declared ; and that no one of them originates in deficiency
of poetic genius. Had they been more and greater, I should still,
as a friend to his literary character in the present age, consider an
analytic display of them as pure gain; if only it removed, as surely
to all reflecting minds even the foregoing analysis must have re-
moved, the strange mistake so slightly grounded, yet so widely and
industriously propagated, of Mr. Wordsworth's turn for simplici-
ty! I am not half as much irritated by hearing his enemies abuse
him for vulgarity of style, subject, and conception, as I am disgust-
ed with the gilded side of the same meaning, as displayed by some
affected admirers, with whom he is, forsooth, a sweet, simple poet!
and so natural, that little master Charles, and his younger sister, are
* Not many months ago, an eminent bookseller was asked what he thought of
1 The answer was, "I have heard his powers very highly spoken of by some of our .first-rate men; but I would not have a work of his if any one
would give it me: for he is spoken but slightly of, or not at all, in the Quarterly
Review; and the Edinburgh, you know, is decided to cut him up!"

<page 281>

280 BIOGRAPHIA LITEIURIA.
so charmed with them, that they play at "Goody Blake," or at
"Johnny and Betty Foy!"
Were the collection of poems published with these biographical
sketches important enough, (which I am not vain enough to be-
lieve,) to deserve such a distinction: even as i have done, so
WOULD I BE DONE UNTO.
For more than eighteen months have the volume of Poems, en-
titled Sibylline Leaves, and the present volumes up to this page
been printed, and ready for publication. But ere I speak of myself
in the tones which are alone natural to me under the circumstances
of late years, I would fain present myself to the reader as I was in
the first dawn of my literary life:
When Hope grew round me, like the climbing vine,
And fruits and foliage not my own seem'd mine!
For this purpose, I have selected from the letters which I wrote
home from Germany, those which appeared likely to be most in-
teresting, and at the same time most pertinent to the title of this
work.
rrpai •
-
*
■
t
•
'

<page 282>
SATYRANE'S LETTERS.
LETTER I.
On Sunday morning, September 16, 1798, the Hamburg Pac-
quet set sail from Yarmouth: and I, for the first time in my life, be-
held my native land retiring from me. At the moment of'its dis-
appearance—in all the kirks, churches, chapels, and meeting-hou-
ses, in which the greater number, I hope, of my countrymen were
at that time assembled, I will dare question whether there was one
more ardent prayer offered up to heaven than that which-1 then pre-
ferred for my country. Now, then, (said I to a gentleman who was
standing near me,) we are out of our country. Not yet, not yet!
he replied, and pointed to the sea; "This, too, is a Briton's coun-
try." This bon mot gave a fillip to my spirits, I rose and looked
round on my fellow-passengers, who were all on the deck. We
were eighteen in number, videlicit, five Englishmen, an English lady,
a French gentleman and his servant, an Hanoverian and his servant,
a Prussian, a Swede, two Danes, and a Mulatto boy, a German
tailor and his wife, (the smallest couple I ever beheld) and a Jew.
We were all on the deck; but in a short time I observed marks of
dismay. The lady retired to the cabin in some confusion, and ma-
ny of the faces round me assumed a very doleful and frog-coloured
appearance; and within an hour the number of those on deck was
lessened by one half. I was giddy, but not sick, and the giddiness
soon went away, but left a feverishness and want of appetite, which
I attributed, in great measure, to the sceva mephitis of the bilge-water; and it was certainly not decreased by the exportations from the
cabin. However, I was well enough to join the ablebodied pas-
sengers, one of whom observed, not inaptly, that Momus might
have discovered an easier way to see a man's inside than by placing
a window in his breast. He needed only have taken a salt-water
trip in a pacquet-boat.
I am inclined to believe, that a pacquet is far superior to a stage-
coach, as a means of making men open out to each other. In the
35

<page 283>
283 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARrA.
latter, the uniformity of posture disposes to dozing, and the definite-
ness of the period at which the company will separate makes each
individual think more of those to whom he is going, than of those
with whom he is going, fiat at sea, more curiosity is excited, if
only on this account, that the pleasant or unpleasant qualities of your
companions are of greater importance to you, from the uncertainty how long you may be obliged to house with them. Besides, if you
are countrymen, that now begins to form a distinction and a bond
of brotherhood; and, if of different countries, there are new incite-
ments of conversation, more to ask and more to communicate, 1
found that I had interested the Danes in no common degree. I had
crept into the boat on the deck and fallen asleep; but was awaked
by one of them about three o'clock in the afternoon, who told me
that they had been seeking me in every hole and corner, and insis-
ted that I should join their party and drink with them. He talked
English with such fluency, as left me wholly unable to account for
the singular and even ludicrous incorrectness with which he spoke
it. I went, and found some excellent wines and a dessert of grapes
with a pine apple. The Danes had christened me Doctor Theolo-
gy, and dressed as I was all in black, with large shoes and black
worsted stockings, I might certainly have passed very well for a
Methodist missionary. However, I disclaimed my title. What
then may you be? A man of fortune? No!—A merchant? No!
A merchant's traveller? No!—A clerk? No !—Un Philosophe,
perhaps? It was at that time_in my life, in which, of all possible
names and characters, I had the greatest disgust to that of "un
Philosophe." But I was weary of being questioned, and rather than
be nothing, or at best, only the abstract idea of a man, I submitted by
a bow, even to the aspersion implied in the word " un Philosophe."
The Dane then informed me, that all in the present party were phi-
losophers likewise. Certes we were not of the stoic school. For
we drank and talked and sung, till we talked and sung altogether;
and then we rose, and danced on the deck a set of dances, which, in
one sense of the word at least, were very intelligibly and appropri-
ately entitled reels. The passengers who lay in the cabin below, in
all the agonies of sea-sickness, must have found our bacchanalian
merriment
. a tune
Harsh and of dissonant mood for their complaint.

i

<page 284>
BI0GRA*HIA LITERARIA. 283
I thought so at the time; and (by way, I suppose, of supporting
my newly-assumed philosophical character) I thought, too, how
closely the greater number of our virtues are connected with the
fear of death, and how little sympathy we bestow on pain, where
there is no danger. •»
, The two Danes were brothers. The one was a man with a clear
white complexion, white hair, and white eye-brows, looked silly,
and nothing that he uttered gave the.iie to his looks. The other,
whom, by way of eminence, I have called the Dane, had likewise
white hair, but was much shorter than his brother, with slender limbs,
and a very thin face slightly pock-fretten. This man convinced me
of the justice of an old remark, that many a faithful portrait in our
novels and farces has been rashly censured for an outrageous cari-
cature, or perhaps nonenity. I had retired to my station in the boat;
he came and seated himself by my side, and appeared not a little
tipsey. He commenced the conversation in the most magnific
style, and as a sort of pioneering to his own vanity, he flattered me
with such grossness! The parasites of the old comedy were mod-
est in the comparison. His language and accentuation were so ex-
ceedingly singular, that I determined, for once in my life, to take
notes of a conversation. Here it follows, somewhat abriged in-
deed, but in all other respects as accurately as my memory permit-
ted.
The Dane. Vat imagination! vat language! vat vast science!
and vat eyes! vat a milk-vite forehead !—•() my heafen! vy, you're
a Got!
Answer. You do me too much honour, Sir.
The Dane. 0 me! if you should dink I is flattering you!—
No, no, no! I haf ten tousand a year! Veil—and vat is dat?
a mere trifle! I 'ouldnt gif my sincere heart for ten times dhe
money.—Yes, you're a Got! I a mere man! But, my dear
friend! dhink of me as a man! Is, is—I mean to ask you now,
my dear friend—is I not very eloquent? Is I not speak English
very fine?
Answ. Most admirably! Believe me, Sir! I have seldom
heard even a native talk so fluently.
The Dane, (squeezing my hand with great vehemence.) My
dear friend! vat an affection and fidelity we have for each odher!
But tell me, do tell me—Is I not, now and den, speak some fault 2
Is I not in some wrong?

<page 285>
284 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
Answ. Why, sir, perhaps it might be observed by nice critics in
the English language, that you occasionally use the word "is" in-
stead of "am." In our best companies, we generally say I am,
and not I is, or Ise. Excuse me, Sir! It is a mere trifle.
The Dane. O! is, is, am, am,am. Yes, yes—I know, I know.
Answ. I am, thou art, he is, we are, ye are, they are.
The Dane. Yes, yes,—I know, I know—Am, am, am, is de
presens, and is, is de perfectum—yes, yes—and are, is dhe plus-
quam perfectum. ,
Answ. And "art," Sir, is •
The Dane. My dear friend! it is dhe plusquam perfectum, no, no—dhat is a great lie. "Are" is the plusquam perfectum—
and "art" is dhe plusquam plueperfectum—(then swinging my
hand to and fro, and cocking his little bright hazel eyes at me that
danced with vanity and wine.) You see, my dear friend! that I
too have some Iehrning. • ■ -
Answ. Learning, Sir? Who dares suspect it? Who can lis-
ten to you for a minute; who can even look at you, without percei-
ving the extent of it?
The Dane. My dear friend !—(then, with a would be humble
look, and in a tone of voice, as if he was reasoning)—I could not
talk so of presens and imperfectum, and futurum and plusquam-
plue perfectum, and all dhat, my dear friend! without some
lehrning?
Answ. Sir! a man like you cannot talk on any subject with-
out discovering the depth of his information.
The Dane. Dhe grammatic Greek, my friend! ha! ha! ha!
(laughing, and swinging my hand to and fro,—then, with a sudden
transition to great solemnity.) Nowl will tell you, my dear friend!
Dhere did happen about me vat de whole historia of Denmark re-
cord no instance about nobody else. Dhe bishop did ask me all
dhe questions about all dhe religion in dhe Latin grammar.
Answ. The grammar, Sir? The language I presume—
The Dane, (a little offended.) Grammar is language, and
language is grammar—
Answ. Ten thousand pardons!
The Dane. Veil, and I was only fourteen years—-
Answ. Only fourteen years old?
The Dane. No more. I was fourteen years old—and he ask-
«d me all questions, religion and philosophy, and all in dhe Latin

<page 286>
BIOGRAPHIA MTERARIA. 295
language—and I answered him all every one, my dear friend! all
in dhe Latin language.
Answ. A prodigy! an absolute prodigy!
The Dane. No, no, no! he was a bishop, a great superin-
tendant.
Answ. Yes! a bishop.
The Dane. A bishop—not a mere predicant, not a prediger—•-
Answ. My dear Sir! we have misunderstood each other. I
said that your answering in Latin at so early an age, was a prodi-
gy, that is, a thing that is wonderful, that does not often happen.
The Dane. Often! Dhere is not von instance recorded in dhe
whole historia of Denmark. -^
Answ. And since then, Sir?
The Dane. I was sent ofer to dhe Vest Indies—to our island,
and dhere I had no more to do vid books. No! no! I put my
genius another way—and I haf made ten tousand pound a year.
Is not dhat ghenius, my dear friend!—But vat is money! I dhink
the poorest man alive my equal. Yes, my dear friend! my little
fortune is pleasant to my generous heart, because I can do good—
no man with so little a fortune ever did so much generosity—no
person, no man person, no woman person ever denies it. But we
are all Got's children.
Here the Hanoverian interrupted him, and the other Dane, the
Swede, and the Prussian, joined us, together with a young English-
man who spoke the German fluently, and interpreted to me many
of the Prussian's jokes. The Prussian was a travelling merchant,
turned of three score, a hale man, tall, strong, and stout, full of sto-
ries, gesticulations, and buffoonery, with the soul as well as the look,
of a mountebank, who, while he is making you laugh, picks your
pocket. Amid all his droll looks and droll gestures, there remained
one look untouched by laughter; and that one look was the true face,
the others were but its mask. The Hanoverian was a pale, fat, bloat-
ed young man, whose father had made a large fortune in London, as
an army contractor. He seemed to emulate the manners of young
Englishmen of fortune. He was a good natured fellow, not without
information or literature, but a most egregious coxcomb. He had
been in the habit of attending the House of Commons, and had
once spoken, as he informed me, with great applause in a debating
society. For this he appeared to have qualified himself with lauda-

<page 287>
286 B10GRAPHIA LITERARIA.
black-eyed Mulatto, had a good-natured round face, exactly the
colour of the skin of the walnut-kernel. The Dane and I were
ble industry, for he was perfect in Walker's Pronouncing Diction-
ary, and with an accent which forcibly reminded me of the Scotch-
man in Roderic Random, who professed to teach the English pro-
nunciation, he was constantly deferring to my superior judgment,
whether or no I had pronounced this or that word with propriety,
or "the true delicacy." When he spoke, though it were only half
a dozen sentences, he always rose; for which I could detect no
other motive than his partiality to that elegant phrase so liberally
introduced in the orations of our British legislators, "While I am
on my legs." The Swede, whom for reasons that will soon appear,
I shall distinguish by the name of "Nobility," was a strong-fea-
tured, scurvy faced man, his complexion resembling in color, a red
hot poker beginning to cool. He appeared miserably dependant
on the Dane, but was, however, incomparably, the best informed,
and most rational of the party. Indeed, his manners and conver-
sation discovered him to be both a man of the world and a gentle-
man. The Jew was in the hold; the French gentleman was lying
on the deck, so ill that I could observe nothing concerning him,
except the affectionate attentions of his servant to him. The poor
fellow was very sick himself, and every now and then ran to the
side of the vessel, still keeping his eye on his master but returned
in a moment and seated himself again by him, now supporting his
head, now wiping his forehead, and talking to him all the while, in
the most soothing tones. There had been a matrimonial squabble
of a very ludicrous kind in the cabin, between the little German
tailor and his little wife. He had secured two beds, one for himself,
and one for her. This had struck the little woman as a very cruel
action; she insisted upon their having but one, and assured the
mate, in the most piteous tones, that she was his lawful wife. The
mate and the cabin boy decided in her favor, abused the little man
for his want of tenderness with much humour, and hoisted him into
the same compartment with his sea sick wife. This quarrel was
interesting to me, as it procured me a bed which I otherwise should
not have had.
In the evening, at 7 o'clock, the sea rolled higher, and the Dane,
by means of the greater agitation, eliminated enough of what he had
been swallowing to make room for a great deal more. His favor-

<page 288>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERAKIA. 287
ite potation was sugar and brandy, i. e. a very little warm water with
a large quantity of brandy, sugar, and nutmeg. His servant boy, a
again seated tete-a-tete in the ship's boat. The conversation,
which was now, indeed, rather an oration than a dialogue, became
extravagant beyond all that I ever heard. He told me that he had
made a large fortune in the island of Santa Cruz, and was now re-
turning to Denmark to enjoy it. He expatiated on the style in
which he meant to live, and the great undertakings which he pro-
posed to himself to commence, till the brandy aiding his vanity, and
his vanity and garrulity aiding the brandy, he talked like a madman
—entreated me to accompany him to Denmark—there I should
see his influence with the government, and he would introduce me
to the king, &c. &c. Thus he went on dreaming aloud,'and then
passing with a very lyrical transition to the subject of general poli-
tics, he declaimed, like a member of the Corresponding Society,
about, (not concerning) the Rights of man, and assured me that
notwithstanding his fortune, he thought the poorest man alive his
equal. "All are equal, my dear friend! all are equal! Ve are
all Got's children. The poorest man haf the same rights with me.
Jack! Jack! some more sugar and brandy. Dhere is dhat fel-
low now! He is a Mulatto—but he is my equal. That's right,
Jack! (taking the sugar and brandy.) Here you Sir! shake
hands with dhis gentleman! Shake hands with me, you dog!
Dhere, dhere!—We are all equal my dear friend! Do I not speak
like Socrates, and Plato, and Cato—they were all philosophers, my
dear philosophe! all very great men!—and so was Homer and Virgil—but they were poets, yes, yes! I know all about it!—But
what can any body say more than this 1 we are all equal, all Got's
children. I haf ten tousand a year, but I am no more than the
meanest man alive. I haf no pride; and yet, my dear friend! I
can say do! and it is done. Ha! ha! ha! my dear friend!
Now dhere is dhat gentleman, (pointing to "Nobility,") he is a
Swedish Baron—you shall see. Ho! (calling to the Swede) get
me, will you, a bottle of wine from the cabin. Swede.—-Here
Jack! go and get your master'a bottle of wine from the cabin I
Bane. No, no, no! do you go now—you go yourself—you go
now! Swede. Pah!—Dane. Now go? Go, I pray you. And
THE SWEDE WENT.
After this, the Dane commenced an harangue on religion, and

<page 289>
288 BIOGRAPHU LITERARIA.
mistaking me for "un philosophe" in the continental sense of the
word, he talked of Deity in a declamatory style, very much resem-
bling the devotional rants of that rude blunderer, Mr. Thomas
Paine, in his Age of Reason, and whispered in my ear, what damn-
ed hypocrism all Jesus Christ's business was. I dare aver, that
few men have less reason to charge themselves with indulging in
persiflage than myself. I should hate it if it were only that it is
a Frenchman's vice, and feel a pride in avoiding it because our own
language is too honest to have a word to express it. But in this in-
stance, the temptation had been too powerful, and I have placed it
on the list of my offences. Pericles answered one of his dearest
friends, who had solicited him on a case of life and death, to take
an equivocal oath for his preservation: Debeo amicis opitulari, sed
usque ad Deos.* Friendship herself must place her last and bold-
est step on this side the altar. What Pericles would not do to save
a friend's life, you may be assured I would not hazard, merely to
mill the chocolate-pot of a drunken fool's vanity till it frothed over.
Assuming a serious look, I professed myself a believer, and sunk
at once an hundred fathoms in his good graces. He retired to his
cabin, and I wrapped myself up in my great coat and looked at the
water. A beautiful white cloud of foam at momentary intervals
coursed by the side of the vessel with a roar, and little stars of flame
danced and sparkled and went out in it: and every now and then,
light detachments of this white cloud-like foam darted off from the
vessel's side, each with its own small constellation, over the sea,
and scoured out of sight, like a Tartar troop over a wilderness.
It was cold, the cabin was at open war with my olfactories, and
I found reason to rejoice in my great coat, a weighty, high-caped,
respectable rug, the collar of which turned over, and played the part
of a nightcap very passably. In looking up at two or three bright
stars, which oscillated with the motion of the sails, I fell asleep,
but was awakened at one o'clock, Monday morning, by a shower
of rain. I found myself compelled to go down into the cabin,
where I slept very soundly, and awoke with a very good appetite,
at breakfast time, my nostrils, the most placable of all the senses,
reconciled to, or, indeed, insensible of the mephitis.
Monday, September I7th, I had a long conversation with the
* Translation. It behooves me to side with my friends, but only as fur as the gods.

<page 290>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 289
Swede, who spoke with the most poignant contempt of the Dane,
whom he described as a fool, purse-mad; but he confirmed the
boasts of the Dane respecting the largeness of his fortune, which
he had acquired in the first instance as an advocate, and afterwards
as a planter. From the Dane, and from himself, I collected, that
he was indeed a Swedish nobleman, who had squandered a fortune
that was never very large, and had made over his property to the
Dane, on whom he was now utterly dependent. He seemed to
suffer very little pain from the Dane's insolence. He was in a high
degree humane and attentive to the English lady, who suffered
most fearfully, and for whom he performed many little offices with
a tenderness and delicacy which seemed to prove real goodness of
heart. Indeed his general manners and conversation were not on-
ly pleasing, but even interesting; and I struggled to believe his in-
sensibility, respecting the Dane, philosophical fortitude. For,
though the Dane was now quite sober, his character oozed out of
him at every pore. And after dinner, when he was again flushed
with wine, every quarter of an hour, or perhaps oftener, he would
shout out to the Swede, "Ho! Nobility, go—do such a thing!
Mr. Nobility! tell the gentlemen such a story, and so forth," with
an insolence which must have excited disgust and detestation, if
his vulgar rants on the sacred rights of equality, joined to this wild
havoc of general grammar, no less than of the English language,
had not rendered it so irresistibly laughable.
At four o'clock, I observed a wild duck swimming on the waves,
a single solitary wild duck. It is not easy to conceive, how inter-
esting a thing it looked in that round, objectless desert of waters. I
had associated-such a feeling of immensity with the ocean, that I
felt exceedingly disappointed, when I was out of sight of all land,
at the narrowness and nearness, as it were, of the circle of the hori-
zon. So little are images capable of satisfying the obscure feel-
ings connected with words. In the evening the sails were lowered,
lest we should run foul of the land, which can be seen only at a
small distance. At four o'clock, on Tuesday morning, I was awa-
kened by the cry of land! land! It was an ugly island, rock at a
distance on our left, called Heiligeland, well known to many pas-
sengers from Yarmouth to Hamburg, who have been obliged, by
stormy weather, to pass weeks and weeks in weary captivity on it,
stripped of all their money by the exhorbitant demands of the wretch.
36

<page 291>
BIOGIUPHIA LITEBARIA.
es who inhabit it. So, at least, the sailors informed me. About nine o'clock we saw the main land, which seemed scarcely able to
hold its head above water, low, flat, and drearyi-with light-houses
and land-marks, which seemed to give a character and language to
the dreariness. We entered the mouth of the Elbe, passing Neu-
werk; though as yet, the right bank only of the river was visible to
us. On this I saw a church, and thanked God for my safe voyage, not without affectionate thoughts of those I had left in England. At eleven o'clock on the same morning, we arrived at Cuxhaven,
the ship dropped anchor, and the boat was hoisted out to carry the
Hanoverian and a few others on shore. The captain agreed to take
us, who remained, to Hamburg for ten guineas, to which the Dane
contributed so largely, that the other passengers paid but half a
guinea each. Accordingly, we hauled anchor, and passed gently up
the river. At Cuxhaven both sides of the river may be seen in clear
weather; we could now see the right bank only. We passed a
multitude of English traders that had been waiting many weeks
for a wind. In a short time both banks became visible, both flat,
and evidencing the labor of human hands, by their extreme neatness.
On the left bank I saw a church or two in the distance; on the
right bank we passed by steeple and windmill, and cottage, and
windmill and single house, windmill and windmill, and neat single house, and steeple. These were the objects, and in the succession.
The shores were very green, and planted with trees not inelegantly. Thirty-five miles from Cuxhaven, the night came on us, and as the
navigation of the Elbe is perilous, we dropped anchor.
Over what place, thought I, does the moon hang to your eye, my
dearest friend? To me it hung over the left bank of the Elbe.
Close above the moon was a huge volume of deep black cloud,
while a very thin fillet crossed the middle of the orb, as narrow, and
thin, and black as a ribbon of crape. The long trembling road of
moonlight, which lay on the water, and reached to the stern of our
vessel, glimmered dimly and obscurely. We saw two or three
lights from the right bank, probably from bed rooms. I felt the striking contrast between the silence of this majestic stream, whose banks are populous with men and women and children, and flocks
and herds—between the silence by night of this peopled river, and
the ceaseless noise and uproar, and loud agitations of the desolate
solitude of the ocean. The passengers below had all retired to

<page 292>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 291
their beds; and I felt the interest of this quiet scene the more deep-
ly, from the circumstance of having just quitted them. For the
Prussian had during the whole of the evening, displayed all his taT*
eots to captivate the Dane, who had admitted him into the train of
his dependents. The young Englishman continued to interpret the
Prussians jokes to me. They were all, without exception, profane
and abominable, but some sufficiently witty, and a few incidents,
which he related in his own person, were valuable as illustrating
the manners of the countries in which they had taken place.
Five o'clock on Wednesday morning we hauled the anchor, but
were soon obliged to drop it again in consequence of a thick fog,
which our captain feared would continue the whole day; but about
nine it cleared off, and we sailed slowly along, close by the shore
of a very beautiful island, forty miles from Cuxhaven, the wind con-
tinuing slack. This holme or island is about a mile and a half in
length, wedge-shaped, well wooded, with glades of the liveliest
green, and rendered more interesting by the remarkably neat farm
house on it. It seemed made for retirement without solitude—a
place that would allure one's friends while it precluded the imper-
tinent calls of mere visiters. The shores of the Elbe now became
more beautiful, with rich meadows and trees running like a low
wall along the river's edge; and peering over them, neat houses
and (especially on the right bank) a profusion of steeple-spires,
white, black or red. An instinctive taste teaches men to build their
churches in flat countries with spire-steeples, which as they cannot
be referred to any other object, point as with a silent finger to the
sky and stars, and sometimes when they reflect the brazen light of
a rich though rainy sunset, appear like a pyramid of flame burning
heavenward. I remember once,and once only, to have seen a spire
in a narrow valley of a mountainous country. The effect was not
only mean but ludicrous, and reminded me, against my will, of an
extinguisher; the close neighborhood of the high mountain at the
foot of which it stood, had so completely dwarfed it, and deprived
it of all connection with the sky or clouds. Forty-six English
miles from Cuxhaven, and sixteen from Hamburg, the Danish
village Veder, ornaments the left bank with its black steeple, and
close by it the wild and pastoral hamlet of Schulau. Hitherto,
both the right and left bank, green to the very brink, and level with
the river resembled the shores of a park canal. The trees and

<page 293>
292 felOGRAt-HIA LIJERARJA.
houses were alike low; sometimes the low trees overtopping the
yet lower houses; sometimes the low houses rising above the yet
lower trees. But at Schulau, the left bank rises at once forty or fif-
ty feet, and stares on the river with its perpendicular fassade of
sand, thinly patched with tufts of green. The Elbe continued to
present a more and more lively spectacle from the multitude of fish-
ing boats and the flocks of sea gulls wheeling round them, the
clamorous rivals and companions of the fishermen; till we came
to Blankaness, a most interesting village scattered amid scattered
trees, over three hills in three divisions. Each of the three hills
stares upon the river, with faces of bare sand with which the boats,
with their bare poles, standing in files along the banks, made a sort
of fantastic harmony. Between each fassade lies a green and
woody dell, each deeper than the other. In short, it is a large vil-
lage made up of individual cottages, each cottage in the centre of its
own little wood or orchard, and each with its own separate path: a
village with a labyrinth of paths, or rather a neighborhood of houses!
It is inhabited by fishermen and boat makers, the Blankanese boats
being in great request through the whole navigation of the Elbe.
Here first we saw the spires of Hamburg, and from hence as far as
Altona, the left bank of the Elbe is uncommonly pleasing, consid-
ered as the vicinity of an industrious and republican city; in that
style of beauty, or rather prettiness, that might tempt ihe citizen
into the country, and yet gratify the taste which he had acquired in
the town. Summer houses and Chinese show-work are every
where scattered along the high and green banks; the boards of the
farm houses left unplaistered and gaily painted with green and yel-
low; and scarcely a tree not cut into shapes, and made to remind
the human being of his own power and intelligence instead of the
wisdom of nature. Still, however, these are links of connection
between town and country, and far better than the affectation of tastes
and enjoyments for which men's habits have disqualified them.
Pass them by on Saturdays and Sundays with the burgers of Ham-
burg smoking their pipes, the women and children feasting in the
alcoves of box and yew, and it becomes a nature of its own. On
Wednesday, four o'clock, we left the vessel, and passing with trouble
through the huge masses of shipping that seemed to choke the wide
Elbe from Altona upward, we were at length landed at the Boom
House, Hamburg.

<page 294>
LETTER II. (to a lady.)
Ratzeburg.
Meine liebe Freundin,
See how natural the German comes from me, though I have
not yet been six weeks in the country!—almost as fluently as Eng-
lish from my neighbour the Amptschreiber, (or public secretary,)
who, as often as we meet, though it should be half a dozen times
in the same day, never fails to greet me with—" * * ddam your
ploot unt eyes, my dearest Englander! vhee goes it?"—which is
certainly a proof of great generosity on his part, these words being
his whole stock of English. I had, however, a better reason than
the desire of displaying my proficiency; for I wished to put you in
good humour with a language, from the acquirement of which I
have promised myself much edification, and the means, too, of
communicating a new pleasure to you and your sister, during our
winter readings. And how can I do this better than by pointing
out its gallant attention to the ladies? Our English affix, ess, is,
I believe, confined either to words derived from the Latin, as act-
ress, directress, &c. or from the French, as mistress, duchess, and
the like. But the German, in, enables us to designate the sex in
every possible relation of life. Thus the Amptman's lady is the
Frau Amptmanin—the secretary's wife (by-the-by the handsomest
woman I have yet seen in Germany) is Die allerliebste Frau Ampt-
schreiberire—the colonel's lady, Die Frau Obristtn or coloneh'w—
and even the pastor's wife, Die Frau pastoriw. But I am espe-
cially pleased with their freundin, which, unlike the arnica of the
Romans, is seldom used but in its best and purest sense. Now,
I know it will be said, that a friend is already something more than
a friend, when a man feels an anxiety to express to himself that
this friend is a female; but this I deny—in that sense, at least, in
which the objection will be made. I would hazard the impeach-
ment of heresy, rather than abandon my belief that there is a sex
in our souls as well as in their perishable garments; and he who
does not feel it, never truly loved a sister—nay, is not capable even
of loving a wife as she deserves to be loved, if she indeed be wor-
thy of that holy name.

<page 295>
294 MOGRAPfilA LITEHARJA.
Now, I know, my gentle friend, what you are murmuring to
yourself-—" This is so like him! running away after the first bubble
that chance has blown off from the surface of his fancy, when one
is anxious to learn where he is, and what he has seen." Well,
then! that I am settled at Ratzeburg, with my motives and the par-
ticulars of my journey hither, will inform you. My first
letter to him, with which, doubtless, he has edified your whole fire-
side, left me safely landed at Hamburg, on the Elbe Stairs, at the
Boom House. While standing on the stairs, I was amused by
the contents of the passage boat which crosses the river once or
twice a day from Hamburg to Haarburg. It was stowed close
with all people of all nations, in all sorts of dresses; the men all
with pipes in their mouths, and these pipes of all shapes and fan-
cies—straight and wreathed, simple and complex, long and short,
cane, clay, porcelain, wood, tin, silver, and ivory; most of them
with silver chains and silver bole-covers. Pipes and boots are the
first universal characteristic of the male Hamburgers that would
strike the eye of a raw traveller. But I forget my promise of jour-
nalizing as much as possible. Therefore—September 19th, after-
noon.—My companion, who, you recollect, speaks the French lan-
guage with unusual propriety, had formed a kind of confidential
acquaintance with the emigrant, who appeared to be a man of sense,
and whose manners were those of a perfect gentleman. He seem-
ed about fifty, or rather more. Whatever is unpleasant in French
manners from excess in the degree, had been softened down by
age or affliction; and all that is delightful in the kind, alacrity and
delicacy in little attentions, &c. remained, and without bustle, ges-
ticulation, or disproportionate eagerness. His demeanor exhibited
the minute philanthrophy of a polished Frenchman, tempered by
the sobriety of the English character, disunited from its reserve.
There is something strangely attractive in the character of a gen-
tleman when you apply the word emphatically, and yet in that sense
of the term which it is more easy to feci than to define. It neither
includes the possession of high moral excellence, nor of necessity
even the ornamental graces of manner. I have now in my mind's
eye, a person whose life would scarcely stand scrutiny, even in the
court of honour, much less in that of conscience; and his manners,
if nicely observed, would, of the two, excite an idea of aukward-
ness rather than of elegance; and yet, every one who conversed

<page 296>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARti. 295
with him felt and acknowledged the gentleman. The secret of the
matter, I believe to be this—we feel the gentlemanly character pre-
sent to us whenever, under all the circumstances of social inter-
course, the trivial not less than the important, through the whole
detail of his manners and deportment, and with the ease of a habit,
a person shows respect to others in such a way, as at the same
time implies, in his own feelings, an habitual and assured anticipa-
tion of reciprocal respect from them to himself. In short, the gen-
tlemanly character arises out of the feeling of equality, acting as a
habit, yet flexible to the varieties of rank, and modified without be-
ing disturbed or superseded by them. Thi3 description will, per-
haps, explain to you the ground of one of your own remarks, as I
was Englishing to you the interesting dialogue concerning the
causes of the corruption of eloquence. "What perfect gentlemen
these old Romans must have been! I was impressed, I remem-
ber, with the same feeling at the time I was reading a translation
of Cicero's philosophical dialogues, and of his epistolary corres-
pondence: while in Pliny's Letters I seemed to have a different
feeling—he gave me the notion of a very fine gentleman." You
uttered the words as if you had felt that the adjunct had injured
the substance, and the increased degree altered the kind. Pliny
was the courtier of an absolute monarch—Cicero, an aristocratic
republican. For this reason the character of gentleman, in the
sense to which I have confined it, is frequent in England, rare in
France, and found, where it is found, in age, or at the latest period
of manhood; while in Germany the character is almost unknown. But the proper antipode of a gentleman is to be sought for among
the Anglo-American democrats.
I owe this digression, as an act of justice, to this amiable French-
man, and of humiliation for myself. For in a little controversy
between us on the subject of French poetry, he made me feel my
own ill behaviour by the silent reproof of contrast; and when I af-
terwards apologized to him for the warmth of my language, he an-
swered me with a cheerful expression of surprise, and an imme-
diate compliment, which a gentleman might both make with digni-
ty, and receive with pleasure. I was pleased, therefore, to find it
agreed on, that we should, if possible, take up our quarters in the
same house. My friend went with him in search of an hotel, and
I to deliver my letters of recommendation.

<page 297>
296 BIOGRAPHIA LITERAMA.
I walked onward at a brisk pace, enlivened not so much by any
thing I actually saw, as by the confused sense that I was for the
first time in my life on the continent of our planet. I seemed to
myself like a liberated bird that had been hatched in an aviary,
who now after his first soar of freedom poises himself in the upper
air. Very naturally I began to wonder at all things, some for be-
ing so like and some for being so unlike the things in England Dutch women with large umbrella hats shooting out half a yard
before them, with a prodigal plumpness of petticoat behind—the
women of Hamburg with caps plated on the caul with silver or
gold, or both, bordered round with stiffened lace, which stood out
before their eyes, but not lower, so that the eyes sparkled through
it—the Hanoverian women with the fore part of the head bare, then
a stiff lace standing up like a wall perpendicular on the cap, and
the cap behind tailed with an enormous quantity of ribbon, which
lies or tosses on the back:
"Their visnomies seem'd like a goodly banner,
Spread in defiance of all enemies." Spihsir.
The ladies all in English dresses, all rouged, and all with bad
teeth: which you notice instantly from their contrast to the almost
animal, too glossy mother-of-pearl whiteness, and the regularity of
the teeth of the laughing, loud-talking country women and servant
girls, who with their clean white stockings, and with slippers with-
out heel-quarters, tripped along the dirty streets as if they were se-
cured by a charm from the dirt; with a lightness, too, which sur-
prised me, who had always considered it as one of the annoyances
of sleeping in an Inn, that I had to clatter up stairs in a pair of
them. The streets narrow; to my English nose sufficiently offen-
sive, and explaining at first sight the universal use of boots; with-
out any appropriate path for the foot-passengers; the gable ends cf the houses all towards the street, some in the ordinary triangular
form, and entire, as the botanists say, but the greater number
notched and scolloped with more than Chinese grotesqueness.
Above all, I was struck with the profusion of windows, so large and
so many that the houses look all glass. Mr. Pitt's window tax,
with its pretty little addilionals sprouting out from it, like young toad-
lets on the back of a Surinam toad, would certainly improve the
appearance of the Hamburg houses, which have a slight summer

<page 298>
BIOGR.APHIA LITERARIA. 297
look, not in keeping with their size, incongruous with the climate,
and precluding that feeling of retirement and self-content, which
one wishes to associate with a house in a noisy city. But a con-
flagration would, I fear, be the previous requisite to the production
of any architectural beauty in Hamburg: for verily it is a filthy
town. I moved on and crossed a multitude of ugly bridges, with
huge black deformities of water wheels close by them. The water
intersects the city every where, and would have furnished to the
genius of Italy the capabilities of all that is most beautiful and
magnificent in architecture. It might have been the rival of Ven-
ice, and it is huddle and ugliness, stench and stagnation. The
Jungfer Stieg, (i. e. young ladies' walk,) to which my letters di-
rected me, made an exception. It is a walk or promenade planted
with treble rows of elm trees, which being yearly pruned and
cropped, remain slim and dwarf-like. This walk occupies one
side of a square piece of water, with many swans on it perfectly
tame; and, moving among the swans, showy pleasure boats with
ladies in them, rowed by their husbands or lovers. ******
(Some paragraphs have been here omitted.)
thus embarrassed by sad and solemn politeness, still more than by
broken English, it sounded like the voice of an old friend when I
heard the emigrant's servant inquiring after me. He had come for
the purpose of guiding me to our hotel. Through streets and
streets I pressed on as happy as a child, and, I doubt not, with a
childish expression of wonderment in my busy eyes, amused by
the wicker wagons with moveable benches across them, one hehind
the other; (these were the hackney coaches;) amused by the sign-
boards of the shops, on which all the articles sold within are paint-
ed, and that, too, very exactly, though in a grotesque confusion;
(a useful substitute for language in this great mart of nations;)
amused with the incessant tinkling of the shop and house door
bells, the bell hanging over each door, and struck with a small iron
rod at every entrance and exit; and finally, amused by looking in
at the windows as I passed along: the ladies and gentlemen drink-
ing coffee or playing cards, and the gentlemen all smoking. I
wished myself a painter, that I might have sent you a sketch of one
of the card parties. The long pipe of one gentleman rested on the
table, its bole half a yard from his mouth, fuming like a censer by
the fish pool; the other gentleman, who was dealing the cards, and
37

<page 299>
298 BIOGRAPHIA LITEItAIUA.
of course had both hands employed, held his pipe in his teeth,
which, hanging down between his knees, smoked beside his ancles.
Hogarth himself never drew a more ludicrous distortion both of at-
titude and physiognomy, than this effort occasioned; nor was there
wanting beside it one of those beautiful female faces which the
same Hogarth, in whom the satirist never extinguished that love of
beauty which belonged to him as a poet, so often and so gladly in-
troduces as the central figure in a crowd of humourous deformities,
which figure (such is the power of true genius!) neither acts, nor
is meant to act, as a contrast; but diffuses through all, and over
each of the group, a spirit of reconciliation and human kindness;
and even when the attention is no longer consciously directed to
the cause of this feeling, still blends its tenderness with our laugh-
ter; and thus prevents the instructive merriment at the whims of
nature, or the foibles or humours of our fellow men, from degenera-
ting into the heart-poison of contempt or hatred.
Our hotel die wilde man, (the sign of which was no bad like-
ness of the landlord, who had engrafted on a very grim face a rest-
less grin, that was at every man's service, and which indeed, like
an actor rehearsing to himself, he kept playing in expectation of an
occasion for it,) neither our hotel, I say, nor its landlord, were of
the genteelest class. But it has one great advantage for a stranger,
by being in the market place, and the next neighbour of the huge
church of St. Nicholas; a church with shops and houses built up
against it, out of which wens and warts its high massy steeple rises,
necklaced near the top with a round of large gilt balls. A better
pole-star could scarcely be desired. Long shall I retain the im-
pression made on my mind by the awful echo, so loud and long
and tremulous, of the deep-toned clock within this church, which
awoke me at two in the morning from a distressful dream, occa-
sioned, I believe, by the feather bed, which is used here instead of
bed clothes. I will rather carry my blanket about with me like a wild
Indian, than submit to this abominable custom. Our emigrant ac-
quaintance was, we found, an intimate friend of the celebrated
Abbe de Lisle; and from the large fortune which he possessed un-
der the monarchy, had rescued sufficient not only for independence,
but for respectability. He had offended some of his fellow emi-
grants in London, whom he had obliged with considerable sums,
by a refusal to make further advances, and in consequence of their

<page 300>
B10GRAPHIA LITERARIA. 299
intrigues, had received an order to quit the kingdom. I thought it
one proof of his innocence, that he attached no blame either to the
alien act, or to the minister who had exerted it against him; and a
still greater, that he spoke of London with rapture, and of his fa-
vourite niece, who had married and settled in England, with all the
fervour and all the pride of a fond parent. A man sent by force
out of a country, obliged to sell out of the stocks at a great loss,
and exiled from those pleasures and that style of society which
habit had rendered essential to his happiness, whose predominant
feelings were yet all of a private nature, resentment for friendship
outraged, and anguish for domestic affections interrupted—such a
man, I think, I could dare warrant guiltless of espoinage in any
service, most of all in that of the present French Directory. He
spoke with extacy of Paris under the monarchy: and yet the par-
ticular facts, which made up his description, left as deep a convic-
tion on my mind, of French worthlessness, as his own tale had
done of emigrant ingratitude. Since my arrival in Germany, I
have not met a single person, even among those who abhor the
revolution, that spoke with favour, or even charity, of the French
emigrants. Though the belief of their influence in the origination
of this disastrous war, (from the horrors of which North Germany
deems itself only reprieved, not secured,) may have some share in
the general aversion with which they are regarded; yet I am deep-
ly persuaded that the far greater part is owing to their own profli-
gacy, to their treachery and hard-heartedness to each other, and
the domestic misery or corrupt principles which so many of them
have carried into the families of their protectors. My heart dilated
with honest pride, as I recalled to mind the stern yet amiable charac-
ters of the English patriots, who sought refuge on the Continent at
the restoration! 0 let not our civil war under the first Charles, be
paralleled with the French revolution! In the former, the chalice
overflowed from excess of principle; in the latter, from the fer-
mentation of the dregs! The former was a civil war between the
virtues and virtuous prejudices of the two parties; the latter, be-
tween the vices. The Venetian glass of the French monarchy
shivered and flew asunder with the working of a double poison.
Sept. 20th. I was introduced to Mr. Klopstock, the brother of
the poet, who again introduced me to professor Ebeling, an intelli-
gent and lively man, though deaf: so deaf, indeed, that it was a

<page 301>
300 biogrAphia literaria.
painful effort to talk with him, as we were obliged to drop all our
pearls into a nuge ear-trumpet. From this courteous and kind-
hearted man of letters, (I hope the German literati in general may
resemble this first specimen,) I heard a tolerable Italian pun, and
an interesting anecdote. When Bonaparte was in Italy, having
been irritated by some instance of perfidy, he said in a loud and
vehement tone, in a public company—" 'Tis a true proverb, gli
Ilaliani iutli ladroni;"—(i. e. the Italians all plunderers.) A lady
had the courage to reply—" Non tuttvma buona parte ;"—(not
all, but a good part, or Buonaparte.) This, I confess, sounded
to my ears as one of the many good things that might have been
said. The anecdote is more valuable, for it instances the ways
and means of French insinuation. Hoche had received much in-
formation concerning the face of the country, from a map of unusu-
al fulness and accuracy, the maker of which, he heard, resided at
Dusseldorf. At the storming of Dusseldorf by the French army,
Hoche previously ordered that the house and property of this man
should be preserved, and entrusted the performance of the order to
an officer on whose troop he could rely. Finding afterwards that
the man had escaped before the storming commenced, Hoche ex-
claimed, "He had no reason to flee! it is for such men, and not
against them, that the French nation makes war, and consents to
shed the blood of its children." You remember Milton's sonnet—
"The great Emathian conqueror bid spare •'' ■
The house of Pindarus, when temple and tower
Went to the ground"
Now, though the Dusseldorf map-maker may stand in the same re-
lation to the Theban bard, as the snail that marks its path by lines
of film on the wall it creeps over, to the eagle that soars sunward,
and beats the tempest with its wings; it does not therefore follow,
that the Jacobin of France may not be as valiant a general and as
good a politician as the madman of Macedon.
From Professor Ebeling's, Mr. Klopstock accompanied my
friend and me to his own house, where I saw a fine bust of his
brother. There was a solemn and heavy greatness in his counte-
nance, which corresponded to my preconceptions of his style and
genius. I saw there, likewise, a very fine portrait of Lessing,
whose works are at present the chief object of my admiration. His eyes were uncommonly like mine; if any thing, rather larger i

<page 302>
BIOGRAPHIA LITEHARIA. 301
more prominent. But the lower part of his face and his nose—O
what an exquisite expression of elegance and sensibility!—There
appeared no depth, weight, or comprehensiveness, in the forehead.
The whole face seemed to say, that Lessing was a man of quick
and voluptuous feelings; of an active, but light fancy; acute; yet
acute not in the observation of actual life, but in the arrangements
and management of the ideal world, i. e. in taste and in metaphy-
sics. I assure you, that I wrote these very words in my memo-
randum book, with the portrait before my eyes, and when I knew
nothing of Lessing but his name, and that he was a German writer
of eminence. ,
We consumed two hours and more over a bad dinner, at the
table d'Hote. ".Patience at a German ordinary, smiling at time."
The Germans are the worst cooks in Europe. There is placed for
every two persons a bottle of common wine, Rhenish and Claret al-
ternately; but in the houses of the opulent, during.themany and long intervals of the dinner, the servants hand round glasses of richer
wines. At the Lord of Culpin's they came in this order: Bur-
gundy—Madeira—Port—Frontiniac—Pacchiaretti—Old Hock—
Mountain—Champagne—Hock again—Bishop, and lastly, Punch.
A tolerable quantum, methinks! The last dish at the ordinary,
viz. slices of roast pork, (for all the larger dishes are brought in,
cut up, and first handed round, and then set on the table,) with
stewed prunes and other sweet fruits, and this followed by cheese
and butter, with plates of apples, reminded me of Shakspeare; *
and Shakspeare put it in my head to go to the French comedy.
******
Bless me! Why it is worse than our modern English plays! The
first act informed me, that a court martial is to be held on a Count
Vatron, who had drawn his sword on the Colonel, his brother-in-
law. The officers plead in his behalf—in vain! His wife, the
Colonel's sister, pleads with most tempestuous agonies—in vain!
She falls into hysterics and faints away, to the dropping of the in-
ner curtain! In the second act sentence of death is passed on the
Count—his wife as frantic and hysterical as before; more so (good
industrious creature!) she could not be. The third and last act,
* " Slender. I bruised my shin with playing with sword and dagger for a dish
of stewed prunes, and by my troth I cannot abide the smell of hot meat since."
So again: Evans. "I will make an end of my dinner; there's pippins and
cheese yet to come."

<page 303>
302 BIOGRAPHIA I.ITERARIA.
the wife still frantic, very frantic indeed! the soldiers just about to
fire, the handkerchief actually dropped, when reprieve! reprieve!
is heard from behin dthe scenes: and in comes Prince somebody,
pardons the Count, and the wife is still frantic, only with joy; that
was all!
O dear lady! this is one of the cases in which laughter is follow-
ed by melancholy: for such is the kind of drama which is now sub-
stituted every where for Shakspeare and Racine. You well know
that I offer violence to my own feelings in joining these names.
But, however meanly I may think of the French serious drama,
even in its most perfect specimens; and with whatever right I may
complain of its perpetual falsification of the language, and of the
connections and transitions of thought, which Nature has appropriated to states of passion; still, however, the French tragedies
are consistent works of art, and the offspring of great intellectual
power. Preserving a fitness in the parts, and a harmony in the
whole, they form a nature of their own, though a false nature. Still
they excite the minds of the spectators to active thought, to a
striving after ideal excellence. The soul is not stupified into mere
sensations by a worthless sympathy with our own ordinary suffer-
ings, or an empty curiosity for the surprising, undignified by the
language or the situations which awe and delight the imagination.
What, (I would ask of the crowd, that press forward to the panto-
mimic tragedies and weeping comedies of Eotzebue and his imita-
tors,) what are you seeking? Is it comedy? But in the comedy
of Shakspeare and Moliere, the more accurate my knowledge, and
the more profoundly I think, the greater is the satisfaction that
mingles with my laughter. For though the qualities which these
writers pourtray are ludicrous indeed, either from the kind or the
excess, and exquisitely ludicrous, yet are they the natural growth
of the human mind, and such as, with more or less change in the
drapery, I can apply to my own heart, or, at least, to whole classes
of my fellow creatures. How often are not the moralist and the
metaphysician obliged for the happiest illustrations of general truths,
and the subordinate laws of human thought and action, to quota-
tions not only from the tragic characters, but equally from the Jac-
■ques, Falstaff, and even from the fools and clowns of Shakspeare,
or from the Miser, Hypochondriast, and Hypocrite, of Moliere!
Say not, that I am recommending abstractions: for these class-


<page 304>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 303
characteristics, which constitute the instructiveness of a character,
are so modified and particularized in each person of the Shaksperi-
an Drama, that life itself does not excite more distinctly that sense
of individuality which belongs to real existence. Paradoxical as it
may sound, one of the essential properties of geometry is not less
essential to dramatic excellence, and (if I may mention his name
without pedantry to a lady) Aristotle has accordingly required of
the poet an involution of the universal in the individual. The chief
differences are, that in geometry it is the universal truth itself,
which is uppermost in the consciousness; in poetry, the individual
form in which the truth is clothed. With the ancients, and not less
with the elder dramatists of England and France, both comedy and
tragedy were considered as kinds of poetry. They neither sought
in comedy to make us laugh merely, much less to make us laugh
by wry faces, accidents of jargon, slang phrases for the day, or the
clothing of common-place morals in metaphors, drawn from the
shops or mechanic occupations of their characters; nor did they
condescend in tragedy to wheedle away the applause of the specta-
tors, by representing before them fac-similies of their own mean
selves in all their existing meanness, or to work on their sluggish
sympathies by a pathos not a whit more respectable than the maud-
lin tears of drunkenness. Their tragic scenes were meant to affect
us indeed, but within the bounds of pleasure, and in union with the
activity both of our understanding and imagination. They wished
to transport the mind to a sense of its possible greatness, and to
implant the germs of that greatness during the temporary oblivion
of the worthless "thing we are," and of the peculiar state in which
each man happens to be; suspending our individual recollections,
and lulling them to sleep amid the music of nobler thoughts.
Hold 1 (mcthinks I hear the spokesman of the crowd reply, and
we will listen to him. I am the plaintiff, and be he the defendant.)
Defendant. Hold! are not our modern sentimental plays
filled with the best Christian morality?
Plaintiff. Yes! just as much of it, and just that part of it
which you can exercise without a single christian virtue—without
a single-sacrifice that is really painful to you!—just as much as
flatters you, sends you away pleased with your own hearts, and
quite reconciled to your vices, which can never be thought very ill
of, when they keep such good company, and walk hand in hand



<page 305>
304 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
with so much compassion and generosity; adulation so loathsome,
that you would spit in the man's face who dared offer it to you in
a private company, unless you interpreted it as insulting irony, you
appropriate with infinite satisfaction, when you share the garbage
with the whole stye, and gobble it out of a common trough. No
Caesar must pace your boards—no Antony, no royal Dane, no
Orestes, no Andromache !—
D. No: or as few of them as possible. What has a 'plain citizen of London or Hamburg to do with your kings and queens,
and your old school-boy Pagan heroes? Besides, every body
knows the stories; and what curiosity can we feel
P. What, Sir, not for the manner? not for the delightful lan-
guage of the poet 1 not for the situations, the action and re-action
of the passions 1
D. You are hasty, Sir! the only curiosity we feel is in the sto-
ry; and how can we be anxious concerning the end of a play, or
be surprized by it, when we know how it will turn out?
P. Your pardon for having interrupted you! we now under-
stand each other. You seek, then, in a tragedy, which wise men
of old held for the highest effort of human genius, the same'grati-
fication as that you receive from a new novel, the last German
romance, and other dainties of the day, which can be enjoyed but
once. If you carry these feelings to the sister art of Painting,
Michael Angelo's Sestine Chapel, and the Scripture Gallery of
Raphael, can expect no favour from you. You know all about
them beforehand; and are, doubtless, more familiar with the sub-
jects of those paintings than with the tragic tales of the historic or
heroic ages. There is a consistency, therefore, in your preference
of contemporary writers: for the great men of former times, those
at least who were deemed great by our ancestors, sought so little
to gratify this kind of curiosity, that they seemed to have regarded
the story in a not much higher light than the painter regards his
canvass; as that on, not by which they were to displajrtheir appro-
priate excellence. No work, resembling a tale or romance, can
well show less variety of invention in the incidents, or less anxiety
in weaving them together, than the Don Quixote of Cervantes.
Its admirers feel the disposition to go back and re-peruse some
preceding chapter, at least ten times for once that they find any
eagerness to hurry forwards: or open the book on those parts

<page 306>
BIOGRAPHIA LITEItARIA. 305
which they best recollect, even as we visit those friends oftenest
whom we love most, and with whose characters and actions we are
the most intimately acquainted. In the divine Ariosto, (as his
countrymen call this, their darling poet,) I question whether there
be a single tale of his own invention, or the elements of which, were
not familiar to the readers of " old romance." I will pass by the
ancient Greeks, who thought it even necessary to the fable of a
tragedy, that its substance should be previously known. That
there had been at least fifty tragedies with the same title, would be
one of the motives which determined Sophocles and Euripides, in
the choice of Electra as a subject. But Milton—
D. Aye, Milton, indeed! but do not Dr. Johnson, and other
great men tell us, that nobody now reads Milton but as a task?
P. So much the worse for them, of whom this can be truly
said! But why then do you pretend to admire Shakspeare 1 The
greater part, if not all, of his dramas were, as far as the names and
the main incidents are concerned, already stock plays. All the
stories, at least, on which they are built, pre-existed in the chroni-
cles, ballads, or translations of contemporary or preceding English
writers. Why, I repeat, do you pretend to admire Shakspeare?
Is it, perhaps, that you only pretend to admire him? However, as
once for all you have dismissed the well known events and person-
ages of history, or the epic muse, what have you taken in their
stead? Whom has your tragic muse armed with her bowl and
dagger? the sentimental muse, I should have said, whom you have
seated in the throne of tragedy? What heroes has she reared on
her buskins?
D. O! our good friends and next door neighbours—honest
tradesmen, valiant tars, high-spirited half pay officers, philanthropic
Jews, virtuous courtezans, tender-hearted braziers, and sentimental
rat catchers! (a little bluff or so, but all our very generous, tender-
hearted characters are a little rude or misanthropic, and all our
misanthropes very tender-hearted.)
P. But I pray you, friend, in what actions, great or interesting,
can such men be engaged?
D. They give away a great deal of money; find rich dowries for young men and maidens, who have all other good qualities;they browbeat lords, baronets, and justices of the peace, (for they are as bold as Hector!) they rescue stage coaches at the instant 38

<page 307>
306 BIOGRAPHIA LlTERARfA.
they are falling down precipices; carry away infants in the sight
of opposing armies; and some of our performers act a muscular
able-bodied man to such perfection, that our dramatic poets, who
always have the actors in their eye, seldom fail to make their fa-
vourite male character as strong as Samson. And then they
take such prodigious leaps! And what is done on the stage, is
more striking even than what is acted. I once remember such a
deafening explosion, that I could not hear a word of the play for
half an act after it; and a little real gunpowder being set fire to at
the same time, and smelt by all the spectators, the naturalness of
the scene was quite astonishing!
P. But how can you connect with such men and such actions
that dependence of thousands on the fate of one, which gives so
lofty an interest to the personages of Shakspeare, and the Greek
tragedians. 1 How can you connect with them that sublimest of
all feelings, the power of destiny and the controlling might of
heaven, which seems to elevate the characters which sink beneath
its irresistible blow 1
D. O, mere fancies! We seek and find on the present stage,
our own wants and passions, our own vexations, losses, and em-
barrassments.
P. It is your poor own pettyfogging nature, then, which you
desire to have represented before you, not human nature in its
height and vigour? But surely you might find the former, with all
its joys and sorrows, more conveniently in your own houses and
parishes.
D. True! but here comes a difference. Fortune is blind, but
the poet has his eyes open, and is besides as complaisant as for-
tune is capricious. He makes every thing turn out exactlyas we
would wish it. He gratifies us by representing those as hateful
or contemptible whom we hate and wish to despise.
P. (aside) That is, he gratifies your envy by libelling your su-
periors. .'
I>. He makes all those precise moralists, who affect to be bet-
ter than their neighbours, turn out at last abject hypocrites, traitors,
and hard-hearted villains; and your men of spirit, who take their
girl and their glass with equal freedom, prove the true men of hon-
our, and (that no part of the audience may remain unsatisfied) re-
form in the last scene, and leave no doubt on the minds of the la-

<page 308>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 307
dies, that they will make most faithful and excellent husbands;
though it does seem a pity, that they should be obliged to get rid
of qualities which had made them so interesting W Besides, the
poor become rich all at once; and, in the final matrimonial choice,
the opulent and high-born themselves are made to confess, that
VIRTUE IS THE ONLY TRUE NOBILITY, AND THAT A LOVELY WO-
MAN IS A DOWRY OF HERSELF!
P. Excellent! But you have forgotten those brilliant flashes
of loyalty, those patriotic praises of the king and old England,
which, especially if conveyed in a metaphor from the ship or the
shop, so often solicit, and so unfailingly receive the public plaudit!
I give your prudence credit for the omission. For the whole sys-
tem of your drama is a moral and intellectual Jacobinism of the
most dangerous kind, and those common-place rants of loyalty are
no better than hypocracy in your play-rights, and your own sympa-
thy with them a gross self-delusion. For the whole secret of dra-
matic popularity consists, with you, in the confusion and subver-
sion of the natural order of things, their causes and their effects;
in the excitement of surprise, by representing the qualities of liberality, refined feeling, and a nice sense of honour (those things,
rather, which pass among you for such) in persons and in classes
of life where experience teaches us least to expect them; and in
rewarding with all the sympathies that are the dues of virtue, those
criminals whom law, reason, and religion, have excommunicated
from our esteem!
And now, good night! Truly! I might have written this last
sheet without having gone to Germany, but I fancied myself talking
to you by your own fireside, and can you think it a small pleasure
to me to forget, now and then, that I am not there? Besides, you
and my other good friends have made up your minds to me as I
am, and from whatever place I write, you will expect that part of
my " Travels" will consist of the excursions in my own mind.

<page 309>
LETTER III.
Ratzeburg.
No little fish thrown back again into the water, no fly unimprisoned
from a child's hand, could more buoyantly enjoy its element, than
I this clean and peaceful house, with this lovely view of the town,
groves, and lake of Ratzeburg, from the window at which I am
writing. My spirits, certainly, and my health I fancied, were be-
ginning to sink under the noise, dirt, and unwholesome air of our
Hamburg hotel. I left it on Sunday, Sept. 23d, with a letter of
introduction from the poet Klopstock, to the Amptman of Ratze-
burg. The Amptman received me with kindness, and introduced
me to the worthy pastor, who agreed to board and lodge me for
any length of time not less than a month. The vehicle, in which
I took my place, was considerably larger than an English stage
coach, to which it bore much the same proportion and rude re-
semblance, that an elephant's ear does to the human. Its top was
composed of naked boards of different colours, and seeming to
have been parts of different wainscots. Instead of windows, there
were leathern curtains with a little eye of glass in each; they perfectly answered the purpose of keeping out the prospect, and letting
in the cold. I could observe little, therefore, but the inns and
farm houses at which we stopped. They were all alike, except in
size: one great room, like a barn, with a hay-loft over it, the straw
and hay dangling in tufts through the boards which formed the
ceiling of the room, and the floor of the loft. From this room,
which is paved like a street, sometimes one, sometimes two smaller
ones, are enclosed at one end. These are commonly floored. In
the large room, the cattle, pigs, poultry, men, women and children,
live in amicable community; yet there was an appearance of clean-
liness and rustic comfort. One of these houses I measured. It
was an hundred feet in length. The apartments were taken off from one corner; between these and the stalls there was a small
interspace, and here the breadth was forty-eight feet, but thirty-two
where the stalls were; of course, the stalls were on each side eight
feet in depth. The faces of the cows, &c. were turned towards

<page 310>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 309
the room; indeed, they were in it, so that they had at least the com-
fort of seeing each other's faces. Stall feeding is universal in this
part of Germany, a practice concerning which the agriculturist
and the poet are likely to entertain opposite opinions, or at least to
have very different feelings. The wood work of these buildings
on the outside is left unplaistered, as in old houses among us, and
being painted red and green, it cuts and tasselates the buildings
very gayly. From within three miles of Hamburg almost to Molln,
which is thirty miles from it, the country, as far as I could see it,
was a dead flat, only varied by woods. At Molln it became more
beautiful. I observed a small lake nearly surrounded with groves,
and a palace in view, belonging to the king of Great Britain, and
inhabited by the Inspector of the Forests. We were nearly the
same time in travelling the thirty-five miles from Hamburg to
Ratzeburg, as we had been in going from London to Yarmouth,
one hundred and twenty-six miles. - -
The lake of Ratzeburg runs from south to north, about nine
miles in length, and varying in breadth from three miles to half a
mile. About a mile from the southernmost point it is divided into
two, of course very unequal parts, by an island, which being con-
nected by a bridge and a narrow slip of land with the one shore,
and by another bridge of immense length with the other shore,
forms a complete isthmus. On this island the town of Ratzeburg
is built. The pastor's house or vicarage, together with the Ampt-
man's, Amptschreiber's, and the church, stands near the summit of
a hill, which slopes down to the slip of land and the little bridge,
from which, through a superb military gate, you step into the island-
town of Ratzeburg. This again is itself a little hill, by ascending
and descending which you arrive at the long bridge, and so to the
other shore. The water to the south of the town is called the Lit-
tle Lake, which, however, almost engrosses the beauties of the
whole: the shores being just often enough green and bare to give
the proper effect to the magnificent groves which occupy the great-
er part of their circumference. From the turnings, windings, and
indentations of the shore, the views vary almost every ten steps,
and the whole has a sort of majestic beauty, a feminine grandeur.
At the north of the Great Lake, and peeping over it, I see the sev-
en church towers of Lubec, at the distance of twelve or thirteen
miles, yet as distinctly as if they were not three. The only defect

<page 311>
310 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
in the view is, that Ratzeburg is built entirely of red bricks, and all
the houses roofed with red tiles. To the eye, therefore, it presents
a clump of brick-dust red. Yet this evening, Oct. 10th, twenty
minutes past five, I saw the town perfectly beautiful, and the whole
softened down into complete keeping, if I may borrow a term from
the painters. The sky over Ratzeburg and all the east, was a pure
evening blue, while over the west it was covered with light sandy
clouds. Hence, a deep red light spread over the whole prospect,
in undisturbed harmony with the red town, the brown-red woods,
and the yellow-red reeds on the skirts of the lake. Two or three
boats, with single persons paddling them, floated up and down in
the rich light, which not only was itself in harmony with all, but
brought all into harmony.
I should have told you that I went back to Hamburg on Thurs-
day, (Sept. 27th,) to take leave of my friend, who travels south-
ward, and returned hither on the Monday following. From Emp-
felde, a village half way from Ratzeburg, I walked to Hamburg
through deep sandy roads, and a dreary flat: the soil every where
white, hungry, and excessively pulverized ; but the approach to the
city is pleasing. Light cool country houses, which you can look
through and see the gardens behind them, with arbours and trellis
work, and thick vegetable walls, and trees in cloisters and piazzas,
each house with neat rails before it, and green seats within the rails.
Every object, whether the growth of nature or the work of man,
was neat and artificial. It pleased me far better than if the houses
and gardens and pleasure fields had been in a nobler taste; for
this nobler taste would have been mere apery. The busy, anxious,
money-loving merchant of Hamburg could only have adopted, he
could not have enjoyed the simplicity of nature. The mind begins
to love nature by imitating human conveniencies in nature; but
this is a step in intellect, though a low one—and were it not so,
yet all around me spoke of innocent enjoyment and sensitive com-
forts, and I entered with unscrupulous sympathy into the enjoy-
ments and comforts even of the busy, anxious, money-loving mer-
chants of Hamburg. In this charitable and catholic mood I reached
the vast ramparts of the city. These are huge green cushions, one
rising above the other, with trees growing in the interspaces, pledges
and symbols of a long peace. Of my return I have nothing worth
communicating, except that I took extra post, which answers to

<page 312>
BIOGRAPHIA UTERARIA. 311
posting in England. These north German post chaises are un-
covered wicker carts. An English dust cart is a piece of finery,
a chef d'ceuvrq of mechanism, compared with them; and the
horses!—a savage might use their ribs instead of his fingers for a
numeration table. Wherever we stopped, the postilion fed his cat-
tle with the brown rye bread of which he eat himself, all breakfast-
ing together, only the horses had no gin to their water, and the
postilion no water to his gin. Now and henceforward for subjects
of more interest to you, and to the objects in search of which I left
you: namely, the literati and literature of Germany.
Believe me, I walked with an impression of awe on my spirits,
as W and myself accompanied Mr. Klopstock to the house
of his brother, the poet, which stands about a quarter of a mile
from the city gate. It is one of a row of little common-place sum-
mer houses, (for so they looked,) with four or five rows of young
meagre elm trees before the windows, beyond which is a green, and
then a dead flat, intersected with several roads. Whatever beauty
(thought I) may be before the poet's eyes at present, it must cer-
tainly be purely of his own creation. We waited a few minutes in
a neat little parlour, ornamented with the figures of two of the mu-
ses, and with prints, the subjects of which were from Klopstock's
odes. The poet entered; I was much disappointed in his counte-
nance, and recognized in it no likeness to the bust. There was no
comprehension in the forehead, no weight over the eye-brows, no
expression of peculiarity, moral or intellectual, on the eyes, no
massiveness in the general countenance. He is, if any thing,
rather below the middle size. He wore very large half-boots,
which his legs filled, so fearfully were they swoln. However,
though neither W nor myself could discover any indications of
sublimity or enthusiasm in his physiognomy, we were both equally
impressed with his liveliness, and his kind and ready courtesy. He
talked in French with my friend, and with difficulty spoke a few
sentences to me in English. His enunciation was not in the least
affected by the entire want of his upper teeth. The conversation
began on his part by the expression of his rapture at the surrender
of the detachment of French troops under General Humbert.
Their proceedings in Ireland with regard to the committee which
hey had appointed, with the rest of their organizing system, seemed
to have given the poet great entertainment. He then declared his

<page 313>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
-■■
sanguine belief in Nelson's victory, and anticipated its confirma-
tion with a keen and triumphant pleasure. His words, tones,
looks, implied the most vehement Anti-Gallicanism. The subject
changed to literature, and I inquired in Latin concerning the His-
tory of German Poetry, and the elder German Poets. To my
great astonishment, he confessed that he knew very little on the
subject. He had indeed occasionally read one or two of their elder
writers, but not so as to enable him to speak of their merits. Pro-
fessor Ebeling, he said, would probably give me every information
of this kind: the subject had not particularly excited his curiosity.
He then talked of Milton and Glover, and thought Glover's blank
verse superior to Milton's. W and myself expressed our sur-
prise; and my friend gave'his definition and notion of harmonious
verse, that it consisted (the English iambic blank verse above all)
in the apt arrangement of pauses and cadences, and the sweep of
whole paragraphs, • -
'with many a winding bout
Of linked sweetness long drawn out," «->;»«r
and not in the even flow, much less in the prominence or antithetic
vigour of single lines, which were indeed injurious to the total
effect, except where they were introduced for some specific pur-
pose. Klopstock assented, and said that he meant to confine
Glover's superiority,to single lines. He told us that he had read
Milton, in a prose translation, when he was fourteen.* I under-
stood him thus myself, and W interpreted Klopstock's French
as I had already construed it. He appeared to know very little of
Milton, or indeed of our poets in general. He spoke with great
indignation of the English prose translation of his Messiah. AH
the translations had been bad, very bad—but the English was no
translation; there were pages on pages not in the original—and
half the original was not to be found in the translation. W
told him that I intended to translate a few of his odes as specimens
of German lyrics; he then said to me in English, "I wish you
would render into English some select passages of the Messiah,
and revenge me of your countryman!" It was the liveliest thing
* This was accidentally confirmed to me by an old German gentleman at Helm-
stadt, who had been Klopstock's school and bed-fellow. Among other boyish
anecdotes, he related that the young poet set a particular value on a translation
of 4ie Paradise Lost, and always slept with it under his pillow.

<page 314>
BIOGBAPHIA LITEKARIA. 313
which he produced in the whole conversation. He told us that
his first ode was fifty years older than his last. I looked at him
with much emotion—I considered him as the venerable father of
German poetry; as a good man; as a christian; seventy-four years
old; with legs enormously swoln, yet active, lively, cheerful, and
kind, and communicative. My eyes felt as if a tear were swelling
into them. In the portrait of Lessing, there was a toupee perri- wig, which enormously injured the effect of his physiognomy;
Klopstock wore the same, powdered and frizzled. By-the-bye,
old men ought never to wear powder—-the contract between a large
snow-white wig and the colour of an old man's skin is disgusting,
and wrinkles in such a neighbourhood appear only channels for
dirt. It is an honour to poets and great men that you think of
them as parts of nature; and any thing of trick and fashion wounds
you in them as much as when you see venerable yews clipped into
miserable peacocks. The author of the Messiah should have
worn his own grey hair. His powder and perriwig were to the
eye, what Mr. Virgil would be to the ear.
Klopstock dwelt much on the superior power which the German
language possessed of concentrating meaning. He said he had
often translated parts of Homer and Virgil, line by line, and a Ger-
man line proved always sufficient for a Greek or Latin one. In
English you cannot do this. I answered, that in English we could
commonly render one Greek heroic line in a line and a half of our
common heroic metre, and I conjectured that this line and a half
would be found to contain no more syllables than one German or
Greek hexameter. He did not understand me; * and I who wished
to hear his opinions, not to correct them, was glad that he did not.
* Klopstock's observation was parlly true and partly erroneous. In the literal
sense of his words, and if we confine the comparison to the average of space re-
quired for the expression of the same thought in the two languages, it is errone-
ous. I have translated some German hexameters into English hexameters, and
find, that on the average, three lines English will express four lines German.
The reason is evident: our language abounds in monosyllables and dissyllables.
The German, not less than the Greek, is a polysyllable language. But in another
point of view the remark was not without foundation. For the German, pos-
sessing the same unlimited privilege of forming compounds, both with preposi-
tions, and with epithets as the Greek, it can express the richest single Greek
word in a single German one, and is thus freed from the necessity of weak or un-
graceful paraphrases. I will content myself with one example at present, viz.
the use of the prefixed particles, ver, zer, ent, and weg: thus, reissen to rend,
verreissen to rend away, zerreissen to rend to pieces, entreissen to rend off or
out of a thing, in the active sense: er schmelzen to melt—ver, zer, ent, schmel-
zen—and in like manner through all the verbs neuter and active. If you con-
sider only how much we should feel the loss of the prefix be, as in bedropt, be-
sprinkle, besot, especially in our poetical language, and then think that this same
39

<page 315>
314 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
We now took our leave. At the beginning of the French Revo-
lution, Klopstock wrote odes of congratulation. He received some
honorary presents from the French Republic, (a golden crown, I
believe,) and, like our Priestly, was invited to a seat in the legisla-
ture, which he declined. But when French liberty metamorphosed
herself into a fury, he sent back these presents with a palinodia,
declaring his abhorrence of their proceedings; and since then he
has been perhaps more than enough an Anti-Gallican. I mean,
that in his just contempt and detestation of the crimes and follies
of the Revolutionists, he suffers himself to forget that the revolu-
tion itself is a process of the Divine Providence; and that as the
folly of men is the wisdom of God, so are their iniquities instru-
ments of his goodness. From Klopstock's house we walked to
the ramparts, discoursing together on the poet and his conversa-
tion, till our attention was diverted to the beauty and singularity of
the sunset, and its effects on the objects round us. There were
woods in the distance. A rich sandy light (nay, of a much deeper
colour than sandy) lay over these woods that blackened in the
blaze. Over that part of the woods which lay immediately under
the intenscr light, a brassy mist floated. The trees on the ram-
parts, and the people moving to and fro between them, were cut or
divided into equal segments of deep shade and brassy light. Had
the trees, and the bodies of the men and women, been divided into*
equal segments by a rule or pair of compasses, the portions could
not have been more regular. All else was obscure. It was a
fairy scene! and to increase its romantic character, among the
moving objects thus divided into alternate shade and brightness,
was a beautiful child, dressed with the elegant simplicity of an
mode of composition is carried through all their simple and compound preposi-
tions, and many of their adverbs; and that with most of these the Germans have
the same privilege as we have of dividing them from the verb and placing them
at the end of the sentence; you will have no difficulty in comprehending the re-
ality and the cause of this superior power in the German of condensing meaning,
in which its great poet exulted. It is impossible to read half a dozen pages of
Wieland without perceiving that in this respect the German has no rival but the
Greek. And yet I seem to feel, that concentration or condensation is not the hap-
piest mode of expressing this excellence, which seems to consist not so much in
the less time required for conveying an impression, as in the unity and simulta-
neousness with which the impression is conveyed. It tends to make their lan-
guage more picturesque: it depictures images better. We have obtained this
power in part by our compound verbs derived from the Latin; and the sense of
its great effect no doubt induced our Milton both to the use and the abuse of Latin
derivatives. But still these prefixed particles, conveying no separate or separa-
ble meaning to the mere English reader, cannot possibly aet on the mind with
the force or liveliness of an original and homogeneous language such as the Ger-
man is, and besides are confined to certain words.

<page 316>
BIOGRAPHI A LITERARIA. 315
English child, riding on a stately goat, the saddle, bridle, and other
accoutrements of which were in a high degree costly and splendid.
Before I quit the subject of Hamburg, let me say, that I remained
a day or two longer than I otherwise should have done, in order to be present at the feast of St. Michael, the patron saint of Hamburg,
expecting to see the civic pomp of this commercial Republic. I
was, however, disappointed. There were no processions; two or
three sermons were preached to two or three old women in two or
three churches, and St. Michael and his patronage wished else-
where by the higher classes, all places of entertainment, theatre,
&c. being shut up on this day. In Hamburg, there seems to be no
religion at all: in Lubec it is confined to the women. The men
seem determined to be divorced from their wives in the other
world, if they cannot in this. You will not easily conceive a more
singular sight than is presented by the vast aisle of the principal
church at Lubec, seen from the organ-loft; for being filled with
female servants, and persons in the same class of life, and all their
caps having gold and silver cauls, it appears like a rich pavement
of gold and silver.
I will conclude this letter with the mere transcription of notes,
which my friend W made of his conversations with Klopstock,
during the interviews that took place after my departure. On these
I shall make but one remark at present, and that will appear a pre-
sumptuous one, namely, that Klopstock's remarks on the venerable
sage of Koenigsburg are, to my own knowledge, injurious and
mistaken; and so far is it from being true that his system is now
given up, that throughout the Universities of Germany there is not
a single professor who is not either a Kantean, or a disciple of
Fichte, whose system is built on the Kantean, and pre-supposes its
truth; or lastly, who, though an antagonist of Kant as to his theo-
retical work, has not embraced wholly or in part his moral system,
and adopted part of his nomenclature. "Klopstock having wished
to see the Calvary of Cumberland, and asked what was thought of
it in England, I went to Remnant's, (the English bookseller,) where
I procured the Analytical Review, in which is contained the review
of Cumberland's Calvary. I remembered to have read there some
specimens of a blank verse translation of the Messiah. I had
mentioned this to Klopstock, and he had a great desire to see them.
I walked over to his house and put the book into his hands. On

<page 317>
316 BIOGRAPHIA LITEHARIA.
adverting to his own poem, he told me he began the Messiah when
he was seventeen; he devoted three entire years-to the plan, with-
out composing a single line. He was greatly at a loss in what
manner to execute his work. There were no successful specimens
of versification in the German language before this time. The
first three cantos he wrote in a species of measured or numerous
prose. This, though done with much labour and some success,
was far from satisfying him. He had composed hexameters both
Latin and Greek as a school exercise, and there had been also in
the German language attempts in that style of versification. These
were only of very moderate merit. One day he was struck with
the idea of what could be done in this way; he kept his room a
whole day, even went without his dinner, and found that in the
evening he had written twenty-three hexameters, versifying a part
of what he had before written in prose. From that time, pleased
with his efforts, he composed no more in prose. To-day he in-
formed me that he had finished his plan before he read Milton. He
was enchanted to see an author who before him had trod the same
path. This is a contradiction of what he said before. He did not
wish to speak of his poem to any one till it was finished; but some
of his friends who had seen what he had finished, tormented him
till he had consented to publish a few books in a journal. He was
then, I believe, very young, about twenty-five. The rest was printed at different periods, four books at a time. The reception given
to the first specimens was highly flattering. He was nearly thirty
years in finishing the whole poem, but of these thirty years not
more than two were employed in the composition. He only com-
posed in favourable moments; besides, he had other occupations.
He values himself upon the plan of his odes, and accuses the mod-
ern lyrical writers of gross deficiency in this respect. I laid the
same accusation against Horace: he would not hear of it—but
waved the discussion. He called Rousseau's Ode to Fortune a
moral dissertation in stanzas. I spoke of Dryden's St. Cecilia;
but he did not seem familiar with our writers. He wished to know
the distinctions between our dramatic and epic blank verse. He
recommended me to read his Herman before I read either the Mes-
siah or the odes. He flattered himself that some time or other his
dramatic poems would be known in England. He had not heard
of Cowper. He thought that Voss, in his translation of the Uliad,

<page 318>
BIOBRAPBIA LITERARIA. 317
had done violence to the idiom of the Germans, and had sacrificed
it to the Greek, not remembering sufficiently that each language
has its particular spirit and genius. He said Lessing was the first
of their dramatic writers. I complained of Nathan as tedious. He
said there was not enough of action in it, but that Lessing was the
most chaste of their writers. He spoke favourably of Goethe; but
said that his " Sorrows of Werter" was his best work, better than
any of his dramas; he preferred the first written to the rest of
Goethe's dramas. Schiller's " Robbers" he found so extravagant
that he could not read it. I spoke of the scene of the setting sun.
He did not know it. He said Schiller could not live. He thought
Don Carlos the best of his dramas; but said that the plot was in-
extricable. It was evident he knew little of Schiller's works; in-
deed, he said he could not read them. Burgher, he said, was a
true poet, and would live; that Schiller, on the contrary, must soon
be forgotten; that he gave himself up to the imitation of Shakspeare,
who often was extravagant, but that Schiller was ten thousand
times more so. He spoke very slightingly of Kotzebue, as an
immoral author in the first place, and next, as deficient in power.
At Vienna, said he, they are transported with him % but we do not reckon the people of Vienna either the wisest or the wittiest people
of Germany. He said Wieland was a charming author, and a
sovereign master of his own language; that in this respect Goethe
could not be compared to him, or, indeed, could any body else.
He said that his fault was to be fertile to exuberance. I told him
the Oberon had just been translated into English, He asked me
if I was not delighted with the poem. I answered, that I thought
the story began to flag about the seventh or eighth book, and ob-
served, that it was unworthy of a man of genius to make the in-
terest of a long poem turn entirely upon animal gratification. He
seemed at first disposed to excuse this by saying, that there are
different subjects for poetry, and that poets are not willing to be
restricted in their choice. I answered, that I thought the passion
of love as well suited to the purposes of poetry as any other pas-
sion; but that it was a cheap way of pleasing, to fix the attention
of the reader through a long poem on the mere appetite. Well,
but, said he, you see that such poems please every body. I an-
swered, that it was the province of a great poet to raise people up
to his own level, not to descend to theirs. He agreed, and con-


<page 319>
318 BI0GRAPH1A T.ITEHAMA.
fessed, that on no account whatsoever would he have written a
work like the Oberon. He spoke in raptures of Wieland's style,
and pointed out the passage where Retzia is delivered of her child,
as exquisitely beautiful. I said that I did not percieve any very
striking passages; but that I made allowance for the imperfections
of a translation. Of the thefts of Wieland, he said, they were so
exquisitely managed, that the greatest writers might be proud to
steal as he did. He considered the books and fables of old ro-
mance writers in the light of the ancient mythology, as a sort of
common property, from which a man was free to take whatever he
could make a good use of. An Englishman had presented him
with the odes of Collins, which he had read with pleasure. He
knew little or nothing of Gray, except his Essay in the church-
yard. He complained of the fool in Lear. I observed, that he
seemed to give a terrible wildness'to the distress; but still he com-
plained. Ho asked whether it was not allowed, that Pope had
written rhyme poetry with more skill than any of our writers. I
said I preferred Dryden, because his couplets had greater variety
in their movement. He thought my reason a good one; but asked
whether the rhyme of Pope were not more exact. This question
I understood as applying to the final terminations, and observed to
him that I believed it was the case, but that I thought it was easy
to excuse some inaccuracy in the final sounds, if the general sweep
of the verse was superior, I told him that we were not so exact
with regard to the final endings of lines as the French. He did
not seem to know that we made no distinction between masculine
and feminine (i. e. single or double) rhymes; at least, he put in-
quiries to me on this subject. He seemed to think that no lan-
guage could ever be so far formed as that it might not be enriched
by idioms borrowed from another tongue. I said this was a very
dangerous practice; and added, that I thought Milton had often
injured both his prose and verse by taking this liberty too frequently.
I recommended to him the prose works of Dryden as models of
pure and native English. I was treading upon tender ground, as
I have reason to suppose that he has himself liberally indulged in
the practice.
The same day I dined at Mr. Klopstock's, where I had the pleas-
ure of a third interview with the poet. We talked principally about
indifferent things. I asked him what he thought of Kant. He said

<page 320>
BIOGRAPHIA LITEKARIA. 319
that his reputation was much on the decline in Germany. That
for his own part he was not surprised to find it so, as the works of
Kant were to him utterly incomprehensible; that he had often been
pestered by the Kanteans, but was rarely iathe practice of arguing
with them. His custom was to produce the book, open it, and
point to a passage, and beg they would explain it. This they or-
dinarily attempted to do, by substituting their own ideas. I do not
want, I say, an explanation of your own ideas, but of the passage
which is before us. In this way I generally bring the dispute to an
immediate conclusion. He spoke of Wolfe as the first metaphysi-
cian they had in Germany. Wolfe had followers, but they could
hardly be called a sect; and luckily till the appearance of Kant,
about fifteen years ago, Germany had not been pestered by any
sect of philosophers whatsoever, but that each man had separately
pursued his inquiries uncontrolled by the dogmas of a Master.
Kant had appeared ambitious to be the founder of a sect—that he
had succeeded, but that the Germans were now coming to their
senses again. That Nicolai and Engel had in different ways con-
tributed to disenchant the nation; but, above all, the incomprehen-
sibility of the philosopher and his philosophy. He seemed pleased
to hear, that as yet Kant's doctrines had not met with any admirers
in England—did not doubt but that we had too much wisdom to be
duped by a writer, who set at defiance the common sense and
common understandings of men. We talked of tragedy. He
seemed to rate highly the power of exciting tears. I said that
nothing was more easy than to deluge an audience; that it was
done every day by the meanest writers."
I must remind you, my friend, first, that these notes, &c. are
not intended as specimens of Klopstock's intellectual power, or
even " colloquial prowess," to judge of which, by an accidental con-
versation, and this with strangers, and those too foreigners, would
be not only unreasonable, but calumnious. Secondly, I attribute
little other interest to the remarks, than what is derived from the
celebrity of the person who made them. Lastly, if you ask me
whether I have read the Messiah, and what I think of it? I answer,
as yet the first four books only; and as to my opinion, (the reasons
of which hereafter,) you may guess it, from what I could not help
muttering to myself, when the good pastor this morning told me
that Klopstock was the German Milton—"a very German Milton
indeed!!!"—Heaven preserve you, and
S. T. Coleridge.

<page 321>
CHAPTER XXIII.
Quid, quod prsefaliouo pramunierim libellum, qua conor omnem orfendiculi
ansam prsecidere 1 Neque quicquam addubito, quin ea candidis omnibus facial
satis. -Quid autem facias istis, qui vel ob ingenii pertinaciam sibi satisfieri nolent,
vel stupidiores dint quam ut satisfactionem iutelligant? Nam quern ad modum
Simonides dixit, Tliessalos hebetiores esse quam ut possint a se decipi, ita quos-
dam videas stupidiores quam ut placari queant. Adhsec, non mirum est, invenire
quod calumnietur qui nihil aliud quserit nisi quod calumnietur.
Erasmus, ad Dorpium Teologttm.
In the rifacciamento of The Friend, I-have inserted extracts
from the Conciones ad Populum, printed, though scarcely publish-
ed, in the year 1795, in the very heat and height of my ant ministe rial enthusiasm: these in proof that my principles of politics have
sustained no change. In the present chapter, I have annexed
to my Letters from Germany, with particular reference to that
which contains a disquisition on the modern drama, a critique on
the Tragedy of Bertram, written within the last twelve months: in
proof, that I have been as falsely charged with any fickleness in my
principles of taste. The letter was written to a friend; and the
apparent abruptness with which it begins, is owing to the omission
of the introductory sentences.
You remember, my dear Sir, that Mr. Whitbread, shortly before
his death, proposed to the assembly subscribers of Drury-Lane
Theatre, that the concern should be farmed to some responsible
individual, under certain conditions and limitations; and that his
proposal was rejected, not without indignation, as subversive of the
main object, for the attainment of which, the enlightened and patri-
otic assemblage of philo-dramatists had been induced to risk their
subscriptions. Now, this object was avowed to be no less than
the redemption of the British stage, not only from horses, dogs, ele-
phants, and the like zoological rarities, but also from the more per-
nicious barbarisms and Kotzebuisms in morals and taste. Drury-
Lane was to be restored to its former classical renown; Shaks-
peare, Johnson, and Otway, with the expurgated muses of Van-
burgh, Congreve and Wycherly, were to be re-inaugurated in their

<page 322>
BIOGRATHIA LITERARIA. 321
rightful dominion over British audiences; and the Herculean process was to commence by exterminating the speaking monsters im-
ported from the banks of the Danube, compared with which their
mute relations, the emigrants from Exeter 'Change, and Polito (late
Pidcock's) show-carts, were tame and inoffensive. Could an he-
roic project, at once so refined and so arduous, be consistently
entrusted to, could its success be rationally expected from a
mercenary manager, at whose critical quarantine the lucri bonus
ordo would conciliate a bill of health to the plague in person?
No! As the work proposed, such must be the work masters.
Rank, fortune, liberal education, and (their natural accompani-
ments or consequences) critical discernment, delicate tact, disin-
terestedness, unsuspected morals, notorious patriotism, and tried
Macaenaship, these were the recommendations that influenced the
votes of the proprietary subscribers of Drury-Lane Theatre, these
the motives that occasioned the election of its Supreme Committee
of Management. This circumstance alone would have excited a
strong interest in the public mind, respecting the first production of
the Tragic Muse which had been announced under such auspices
and had passed the ordeal of such judgments; and the Tragedy, on which you have requested my judgment, was the work on which the
great expectations, justified by so many causes, were doomed at
length to settle. •
But before I enter on the examination of Bertram, or the Castle
q/" St. Mdobrand I shall interpose a few words on the phrase Ger-
man Drama, which I hold to be altogether a misnomer. At the
time of Lessing, the German Stage, such as it was, appears to have
been a flat and servile copy of the French. It was Lessing who
first introduced the name and the works of Shakspeare to the ad-
miration of the Germans; and I should not, perhaps, go too far, if
I add, that it was Lessing who first proved to all thinking men, even
to Shakspeare's own countrymen, the true nature of his apparent
irregularities. These, he demonstrated were deviations only from
the Accidents of the Greek Tragedy; and from such accidents as
hung a heavy weight on the wings of the Greek Poets, and narrow-
ed their flight within the limits of what we may call the Heroic Op-
era. He proved, that in all the essentials of art, no less than in the
truth of nature, the plays of Shakspeare were incomparably more
coincident with the principles of Aristotle, than the productions of
40

<page 323>
322 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
Corneille and Racine, notwithstanding the boasted regularity of the
latter. Under these convictions, were Lessing's own dramatic
works composed. Their deficiency is in depth and in imagination;
their excellence is in the construction of the plot, the good sense
of the sentiments, the sobriety of the morals, and the high polish of
the diction and dialogue. In short, his dramas are the very antip-
odes of all those which it has been the fashion, of late years, at once
to abuse and to enjoy under the name of the German Drama. Of
this latter, Schiller's Robbers was the earliest specimen; the first
fruits of his youth, (I had almost said of his boyhood) and, as such,
the pledge and promise of no ordinary genius. Only as such did
the maturer judgment of the author tolerate the play. During his
whole life he expressed himself concerning this production, with
more than needful asperity, as a monster not less offensive to good
taste than to sound morals; and, in his latter years, his indignation
at the unwonted popularity of the Robbers, seduced him into contra-
ry extremes, viz. a studied feebleness of interest, (as far as the in-
terest was to be derived from incidents and the excitement of curi-
osity;) a diction elaborately metrical; the affectation of rhymes;
and the pedantry of the chorus. But to understand the true char-
acter of the Robbers, and of the countless imitations which were its
spawn, I must inform you, or at least, call to your recollection, that
about that time, and for some years before it, three of the most
popular books in the German language, were, the translations of
Young's Night Thoughts, Herveifs Meditations, and Richardson's
Clarissa Harlowe. Now, we have only to combine the bloated
style and peculiar rhythm of Hervey, which is poetic only on ac-
count of its utter unfitness for prose, and might as appropriately be
called prosaic, from its utter unfitness for poetry; we have only, I
repeat, to combine these Herveyisms with the strained thoughts, the
figurative metaphysics and solemn epigrams of Young on the one
hand; and with the loaded sensibility, the minute detail, the mor-
bid consciousness of every thought and feeling in the whole flux
and reflux of the mind, in short, the self-involution and dreamlike
continuity of Richardson on the other hand; and then, to add the
horrific incidents, and mysterious villains—(geniuses of supernatu-
ral intellect, if you will take the author's words for it, but on a level
with the meanest ruffians of the condemned cells, if we are to judge
by their actions and contrivances)—to add the ruined castles, the


<page 324>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 323
dungeons, the trap doors, the skeletons, the flesh-and-blood ghosts,
and the perpetual moonshine of a modern author, (themselves the
literary brood of the Castle of Olranto, the translations of which,
with the imitations and improvements aforesaid, were about that
time beginning to make as much noise in Germany as their origi-
nals were making in England)—and as the compound of these in-
gredients duly mixed, you will recognise the so called German Dra-
ma. The Olla Podrida thus cooked up, was denounced, by the
best critics in Germany, as the mere cramps of weakness, and or-
gasms of a sickly imagination, on the part of the author, and the
lowest provocation of torpid feeling on that of the readers. The
old blunder, however,conceming the irregularity and wildness of
Shakspeare, in which the German did but echo the French, who
again were but the echoes of our own critics, was still in vogue, and
Shakspeare was quoted as authority for the most anti Shakspearean
Drama. We have, indeed, two poets who wrote as one, near the
age of Shakspeare, to whom, (as the worst characteristic of their
writings) the Coryphaeus of the present Drama may challenge the
honour of being^a poor relation, or impoverished descendant. For
if we would charitably consent to forget the comic humour, the wit,
the felicities of style, in other words, all the poetry, and nine-tenths
of all the genius of Beaumont and Fletcher, that which would re-
main becomes a Kotzebue.
The so-called German Drama, therefore, is English in its origin,
English in its materials, and English by re-adoption; and till we
can prove that Kotzebue, or any of the whole breed of Kotzebues,
whether dramatists or romantic writers, or writers of romantic dra-
mas, were ever admitted to any other shelf in the libraries of well-
educated Germans than were occupied by their originals, and apes'
apes in their mother country, we should submit to carry our own
brat on our own shoulders; or, rather, consider it as a lack-grace returned from transportation with such improvements only in growth
and manners as young transported convicts usually come home
with.
I know nothing that contributes more to a clear insight into the
true nature of any literary phenomenon, than the comparison of it
with some elder production, the likeness of which is striking, yet
only apparent; while the difference is real. In the present case
this opportunity is furnished us by the old Spanish play, entitled An-

<page 325>
BIOGRAPHIA LITEHARIA.
theisla Fulminato, formerly, and perhaps still, acted in the churches
and monasteries of Spain, and which, under various names, (JDon
Juan, the Libertine, fyc.) has had its day of favour in every country
throughout Europe. A popularity so extensive, and of a work so
grotesque and extravagant, claims and merits philosophical attention
and investigation. The first point to be noticed is, that the play is
throughout imaginative. Nothing of it belongs to the real world
but the names of the places and persons* The- comic parts equal-
ly with the tragic; the living, equally with the defunct characters,
are creatures of the brain; as little amenable to the rules of ordi-
nary probability as the Satan of Paradise-Lost, or the Caliban of
the Tempest, and, therefore, to be understood and judged of as im-
personated abstractions. Rank, fortune,wit, talent, acquired know-
ledge, and liberal accomplishments, with beauty of person, vigorous
health, and constitutional hardihood—all these advantages, elevated
by the habits and sympathies of noble birth and national character,
are supposed to have combined in Don Juan, so as to give him the
means of carrying into all its practical consequences the doctrine of
a godless nature as the sole ground and efficient cause not only of
all things, events, and appearances, but, likewise, of all our thoughts,
sensations, impulses, and actions. Obedience to nature is the only virtue; the gratification of the passions and appetites her only
dictate; each individual's self-will ihe sole organ through which
nature utters her commands, and
"Self-contradiction is the only wrong!
For, by the laws of spirit, in the right
Is every individual character
That acts in strict consistence with itself." \ ■That speculative opinions, however impious and daring they may
be, are not always followed by correspondent conduct, is most true,
as well as that they can scarcely, in any instance, be systematically
realized, on account of their unsuitableness to human nature and to
the institutions of society. It can be hell, only where it is all hell;
and a separate world of devils is necessary for the existence of any
one complete devil. But, on the other hand, it is no less clear,
nor, with the biography of Carrier and his fellow atheists before us,
can it be denied, without wilful blindness, that the (so called) system
of nature, (i. e. materialism, with the utter rejection of moral respon-
sibility, of a present providence and of a both present and future

<page 326>
BIOGBAPHIA LITERARIA. 325
retribution) may influence the characters and actions of individuals,
and even of communities to a degree that almost does away the dis-
tinction between men and devils, and will make the page of the future
historian, resemble the narration of a madman's dreams. It is not
the wickedness of Don Juan, therefore, which constitutes the charac-
ter an abstraction, and removes it from the rules of probability; but
the rapid succession of the correspondent acts and incidents, his in-
tellectual superiority, and the splendid accumulation of his gifts and
desirable qualities, as co-existent with entire wickedness in one and
the same person. But this likewise, is the very circumstance which
gives to this strange play its charm and universal interest. Don
Juan is, from beginning to end, an intelligible character, as much so
as the Satan of Milton. The poet asks only of the reader, what as
a poet, he is privileged to ask, viz., that sort of negative faith in the
existence of such a being, which we willingly give to productions
professedly ideal, and a disposition to the same state of feeling as that
with which we contemplate the idealized figures of the Apollo Belvi-
dere, and the Farnese Hercules. What the Hercules is to the eye in
corporeal strength, Don Juan is to the mind in strength of charac-
ter. The ideal consists in the happy balance of the generic with
the individual. The former makes the character representative
and symbolical, therefore instructive; because, mutatis mutandis,
it is applicable to whole classes of men. The latter gives its living
interest; for nothing lives or is real, but as definite and individual.
To understand this completely, the reader need only recollect the
specific state of his feelings, when in looking at a picture of the
historic (more properly of the poetic or heroic) class, he objects
to a particular figure as being too much of a portrait; and this in-
terruption of his complacency he feels without the least reference
to, or the least acquaintance with, any person in real life whom he
might recognise in this figure. It is enough that such a figure is
not ideal; and therefore, not ideal, because one of the two factors
or elements of the ideal is in excess. A similar and more power-
ful objection he would feel towards a set of figures which were mere
abstractions, like those of Cipriani, and what have been called Greek
forms and faces, i. e. outlines drawn according to a recipe. These
again are not ideal, because in these the other element is in excess.
"Forma formans per formam formatam franslucens," is the defini-
tion and perfection of ideal art.

<page 327>
326 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
This excellence is so happily achieved in the Don Juan, that it
is capable of interesting without poetry, nay, even without words,
as in our pantomime of that name. We see, clearly, how the char-
acter is formed; and the very extravagance of the incidents, and
the super-human entireness of Don Juan's agency, prevents the
wickedness from shocking our minds to any painful degree. (We
do not believe it enough for this effect; no, not even with that kind
of temporary and negative belief or acquiescence which I have
described above.) Meantime the qualities of his character are too
desirable, too flattering to our pride and our wishes, not to make up
on this side as much additional faith as was lost on the other.
There is no danger (thinks the spectator or reader) of my becoming
such a monster of iniquity as Don Juan! I never shall be an
atheist! I shall never disallow all distinction between right and
wrong! / have not the least inclination to be so outrageous a
drawcansir in my love affairs! But to possess such a power of
captivating and enchanting the affections of the other sex! to be
capable of inspiring in a charming and even a virtuous woman, a
love so deep, and so entirely personal to me! that even my worst
vices, (if I were vicious) even my cruelty and perfidy, (if I were
cruel and perfidious) could not eradicate the passion! To be so
loved for my own self, that even with a distinct knowledge of my
character, she yet died to save me! this, sir, takes hold of two
sides of our nature, the better and the worse. For the heroic dis-
interestedness to which love can transport a woman, cannot be con-
templated without an honourable emotion of reverence towards womanhood; and on the other hand, it is among the miseries, and
abides in the dark ground-work of our nature, to crave an outward
confirmation of that something within us, which is our very self, that
something, not made up of our qualities and relations, but itself the
supporter and substantial basis of all these. Love me, and not my
qualities, may be a vicious and an insane wish, but it is not a wish
wholly without a meaning.
Without power, virtue would be insufficient and incapable of re-
vealing its being. It would resemble the magic transformation of
Tasso's heroine into a tree, in which she could only groan and bleed.
(Hence power is necessarily an object of our desire and of our ad-
miration.) But of all power, that of the mind is, on every account,
the grand desideratum of human ambition. We shall be as gods

<page 328>
BI0GRAPIIIA LITERARIA. 327
in knowledge, was and must have been the first temptation; and
the co-existence of great intellectual lordship with guilt has never
been adequately represented without exciting the strongest interest,
and for this reason, that in this bad and heterogeneous co-ordination
we can contemplate the intellect of man more exclusively as a sep-
arate self subsistence, than in its proper state of subordination to
his own conscience, or to the will of an infinitely superior being.
This is the sacred charm of Shakspeare's male characters in
general. They are all cast in the mould of Shakspeare's own gi-
gantic intellect; and this is the open attraction of his Richard, la-
go, Edmund, &c. in particular. But again; of all intellectual pow-
er, that of superiority to the fear of the invisible world is the most
dazzling. Its influence is abundantly proved by the one circum-
stance, that it can bribe us into a voluntary submission of our better
knowledge, into suspension of all our judgment derived from con-
stant experience, and enable us to peruse with the liveliest interest,
the wildest tales of ghosts, wizards, genii, and secret talismans.
On this propensity, so deeply rooted in our nature, a specific dra -
matic probability may be raised by a true poet, if .the wholeof his
work be in harmony; a dramatic probability, sufficient for dramatic
pleasure, even when the component characters and incidents border
on impossibility. The poet does not require us to be awake and
believe; he solicits us only to yield ourselves to a dream; and
this too with our eyes open, and with our judgment perdue behind
the curtain ready to awake us at the first motion of our will; and
meantime, only not to disbelieve. And in such a state of mind,
who but must be impressed with the cool intrepidity of Don John on
the appearance of his father's ghost:
"Ghost.—Monster! behold these wounds!" ",
"D. John.—I do! They were well meant, and well performed, I see."
"Ghost. Repent, repent of all thy villanies.
My clamorous blood to heaven for vengeance cries,
Heaven will pour out his judgments on you all.
Hell gapes for you, for you each fiend doth call,
And hourly waits your unrepenting fall.
You with eternal horrors they'll torment,
Except of all your crimes you suddenly repent."
(Ghost sinks.)
"D. John.—Farewell, thou art a foolish ghost. Repent quoth he! what could
this mean? Our senses are all in a mist, sure."
"D. Antonio.—(one of D. Juan's reprobate companions.) They are not!
'Twas a ghost."

<page 329>
328 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
"D. Lopez.—(another reprobate.) I ne'er believed those foolish tales be-
fore."
"D. John.—Come! "Tig no matter. Let it be what it will, it must be nat-
ural."
"D. Ant■—And nature is unalterable in us too."
"D. John.—"Pis true 1 The nature of a ghost cannot change ours."
Who also can deny a portion of sublimity to the tremendous
consistency with which he stands out the last fearful trial, like a
second Prometheus?
"Chorus of Devils."
"Statde-Ghost.—Will you not relent and feel remorse 7"
"D. John.—Couldst thou bestow another heart on me, I might. But with this
heart I have, I cannot."
"D. Lopez.—These things are prodigious."
"D. Anton I have a sort of grudging to relent, but something holds me
ba-ck."
"D. Lop.—If we could, 'tis now too late. I will not.""D. Ant.—We defy thee!"
"Ghost.—Perish ye impious wretches, go and find the punishments laid up in
store for you!''
(Thunder and lightning. D. Lop. and D. Ant. are swallowed up.)
"Ghost toD. John.—Behold their dreadful fates and know that thy last mo-
ment's come!"
"D. John.—Think not to fright me, foolish ghost; I'll break your marble body
in pieces, and pull down your horse."
(Thunder and lightning—chorus'of devils, &c,
"D. John.—These things I see with wonder but no fear.
Were all the elements to be confounded,
And shuffled all into their former chaos;
Were seas of sulphur flaming round about me,
And all mankind roaring within those fires,
I could not fear, or feel the least remorse.
To the last instant I would dare thy power.
Here I stand firm, and all thy threats condemn.
Thy murderer (to the ghost of one whom he had murdered)
Stands-here! Now do thy worst!"
{He is swallowed up in a cloud of fire.)
In fine, the character of Don John consists in the union of every
thing desirable to human nature as means, and which therefore, by
the well-known law of association become at length desirable on
their own account, and in their own dignity they are here displayed,
as being employed to ends so wihuman, that in the effect they ap-
pear almost as means without an end. The ingredients too are mix-
ed in the happiest proportion, so as to uphold and relieve each
other—more especially in that constant interpoise of wit, gayety,

<page 330>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
and social generosity, which prevents the criminal, even in his most
atrocious moments, from sinking into the mere ruffian, as far at
least, as our imagination sits in judgment. Above all, the fine suf-
fusion through the whole, with the characteristic manners and feel-
ings of a highly bred gentleman gives life to the drama. Thus
having invited the statue ghost of the governor whom he had mur-
dered, to supper, which invitation the marble ghost accepted by a
nod of the head, Don John has prepared a banquet.
"D.. John.—Some wine, sirrah! Here's to Don Pedro's ghost—he should have
been welcome."
"D. Lop.—The rascal is afraid of yon after death." ,
(One knocks hard at the door.)
"D. John.—(to the servant)—Rise and do your duty."
"Serv.—Oh the devil, the devil!" (marble ghost enters.)
"D. John.—Ha! 'tis the ghost! Let's rise and receive him! Come Governor
you are welcome, sit there; if we had thought you would have come, we would have staid for you.
* * ***** * * Here Governor, your health! Friends put it about! Here's excellent meat,
taste of this ragout. Come I'll help you, come eat, and let old quarrels be for-
gotten." •
(The ghost threatens him with vengeance.)"D. John.—We are too much confirmed—curse on this dry discourse. Come here's to your mistress; you had one when you were living: not forgetting your
sweet sister."' , „ .,
(Devils enter.)
D. John.—Are these some of your retinue 7 Devils say you? I'm sorry I have no burnt brandy to-treat 'em with; that's drink fit for devils." &e. ■
Nor is the scene from which we quote interesting in dramatic
probability alone; it is susceptible likewise of a sound moral; of
a moral that has more than common claims on the notice of a too
numerous class, who are ready to receive the qualities of gentle-
manly courage, and scrupulous honour (in all the recognized laws
of honour) as the substitutes of virtue, instead of its ornaments.
This, indeed, is the moral value of the play at large, and that which
places it at a world's distance from the spirit of modern jacobinism.
The latter introduces to us clumsy copies of these showy instru-
mental qualities, in order to reconcile us to vice and want of princi-
ple; while the Mheisla Fulminato, presents an exquisite portraiture
of the same qualities, in all their gloss and glow; but presents them
for the sole purpose of displaying their hollowness, and in order to
put us on our guard by demonstrating their utter indifference to
41

<page 331>
33(7 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
vice and virtue, whenever these and the like accomplishments are contemplated for themselves alone.
Eighteen years ago I observed, that the whole secret of the mod-
ern jacobinical drama, (which, and not the German is its appropri-
ate designation) and of all its popularity, consists in the confusion
and subversion of the natural order of things in their causes and
effects: namely, in the excitement of surprise by representing the
qualities of liberality, refined feeling, and a nice sense of honour
(those things rather which pass amongst us for such) in persons
and in classes where experience teaches us least to expect them j
and by rewarding with all the sympathies which are the due of vir-
tue, those criminals whom law, reason, and religion have excommu-
nicated from our esteem.
This of itself would lead me back to Bertram or the Castle of St.
Mdobrand; but, in my own mind, this tragedy was brought into
connexion with the Libertine, (Shadwell's adaptation of the Mhe.
ista Fulminato to the English stage in the reign of Charles the Sec-
ond) by the fact, that our modern drama is taken, in the substance
of it, from the first scene of the third act of the Libertine. But
with what palpable superiority of judgment in the original! Earth
and hell, men and spirits, are up in arms against Don John: the
two former acts of the Play have not only prepared us for the
supernatural, but accustomed us to the prodigious. It is, there-
fore, neither more nor less than we anticipate, when the captain
exclaims, "In all the dangers I have been, such horrors I never
knew. I am quite unmanned;" and when the hermit says, "that
he had beheld the ocean in wildest rage, yet ne'er before saw a
storm so dreadful, such horrid flashes of lightning, and such claps
of thunder, were never in my remembrance." And Don John's
burst of startling impiety is equally intelligible in its motive, as
dramatic in its effect.
But what is there to account for the prodigy of the tempest at
Bertram's shipwreck? It is a mere supernatural effect without
even a hint of any>supernatural agency; a prodigy without any cir-
cumstance mentioned that is prodigious; and a miracle introduced
without a ground, and ending without a result. Every event and
every scene of the play might have taken place as well if Bertram
and his vessel had been driven in by a common hard gale, or from
want of provisions. The first act would have indeed lost its great-

<page 332>
BIOGRAFHIA. LITERARIA. 331
est and most sonorous picture: a scene for the sake of a scene,
without a word spoken; as such, therefore, (a rarity without a pre-
cedent) we must take it, and be thankful! In the opinion of not a
few, it was, in every sense of the word, the best scene in the play.
I am quite certain it was the most innocent: and the steady, quiet
uprightness of the flame of the wax-candles which the monks held
over the roaring billows amid the storm of wind and rain, was really
miraculous.
The Sicilian sea coast: a convent of monks: night: a most
portentous, unearthly storm: a vessel is wrecked: contrary to all
human expectation, one man saves himself by his prodigious pow-
ers as a swimmer, aided by the peculiarity of his destination—
Prior. "All, all did perish—
1st Monk.—Change, change those drenched weeds—
Prior.—I wist not of them—every soul did perish—
Enter 3d Monk, hastily. 3d Monk.—No, there was one did battle with the storm
With careless desperate force; full many times
His life was won and lost, as tho' he recked not—
No hand did aid him, and he aided none—
Alone he breasted the broad wave, alone
That man was saved." '.
Well 1 This man is led in by the monks, supposed dripping wet,
and to very natural inquiries, he either remains silent, or gives most
brief and surly answers, and after three or four of these half-line
courtesies, "dashing off the monks" who had saved him, he ex-
claims in the true sublimity of our modern misanthropic heroism—
"Off! ye are men—there's poison in your touch. But I must yield, for this (what ?) hath left me strengthless."
So end the three first scenes. In the next, (the Castle of St. Al-
dobrand) we find the servants there equally frightened with this un-
earthly storm, though wherein it differed from other violent storms
we are not told, except that Hugo informs us, page 9—
Put.—" Hugo, well met Does e'en thy age bear
Memory of so terrible a storm?
Hugo.—They have been frequent lately.
Piet.—They are ever so in Sicily. , . <Hugo.—So it is said. But storms when I was young
Would still pass o'er like Nature's fitful fevers,
And rendered all more wholesome. Now their rage
Sent thus unseasonable and profitless
Speaks like threats of heaven."

<page 333>
332 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
A most perplexing theory of Sicilian storms is this of old Hugo!
and what is very remarkable, not apparently founded on any great
familiarity of his own with this troublesome article. For when
Pietro asserts the "ever more frequency" of tempests in Sicily, the
old man professes to know nothing moreof the fact, but by hearsay.
"So it is said."—But why he assumed this storm to be unseasona-
ble, and on what he grounded his prophecy, (for the storm is still in
full fury) that it would be profitless, and without the physical pow-
ers common to all other violent sea-winds in purifying the atmos-
phere, we are left in the dark; as well concerning the particular
points in which he knew it (during its continuance) to differ from
those that he had been acquainted with in his youth. We are at
length introduced to the Lady Imogiue, who, we learn, had not
rested "through" the night, not on account of the tempest, for
"Long 'ere the storm arose, her restless gestures
Forbade all hope to see her blest with sleep." -
Sitting at a table, and looking at a portrait, she informs us—First,
that portrait painters may make a portrait from memory—
"The limner's art may trace the absent feature."
For surely these words could never mean, that a painter may have
a person sit to him, who afterwards may leave the room or perhaps
the country 1 Second, that a portrait-painter can enable a mourning lady to possess a good likeness of her absent lover, but that the
portrait painter cannot, and who shall—
"Restore the scenes in which they met and parted 1"
The natural answer would have been—Why the scene-painter to
be sure! But this unreasonable lady requires, in addition, sundry
things to be painted that have neither lines nor colours—
"The thoughts, the recollections sweet and bitter
Or the Elysian dreams of lovers when they loved."
Which last sentence must be supposed to mean: when they were
present and making love to each other.—Then, if this portrait could
speak, it would "acquit the faith of womankind." How? Had
she remained constant? No, she has been married to another man,
whose wife she now is. How then? Why, that in spite of her

<page 334>
BIOfcRAfHIA MTERARIA. 333
marriage vow, she had continued to yearn and crave for her former
lover—
"This hasher body,-that her mind;
Which has the better bargain?" •
The lover, however, was not contented with this precious ar-
rangement, as we shall soon find. The lady proceeds to inform
us, that during the many years of their separation, there have hap-
pened in the different parts of the world, a number of " such things ;*'
even such as in a course of years always have, and, till the millen-
nium, doubtless always will happen somewhere or other. Yet this
passage, both in language and in metre, is, perhaps, among the best
partsjof the Play. The lady's loved companion and most esteem-
ed attendant, Clotilda, now enters and explains this love and es-
teem by proving herself a most passive and dispassionate listener,
as well as a brief and lucky querist, who asks by chance, questions
that we should have thought made for the very sake of the an-
swers. In short, she very much reminds us of those puppet-he-
roines, for whom the showman contrives to dialogue, without any
skill in ventriloquism. This, notwithstanding, is the best scene in
the Play, and though crowded with solecisms, corrupt diction, and
offences against metre, would possess merits sufficient to outweigh
them, if we could suspend the moral sense during the perusal. It
tells well and passionately the preliminary circumstances, and thus
overcomes the main difficulty of most first acts, viz. that of ret-
rospective narration. It tells us of her having been honourably
addressed by a noble youth, of rank and fortune vastly superior
to her own: of their mutual love, heightened on her part by
gratitude; of his loss of his sovereign's favour; his disgrace,
attainder and flight; that he (thus degraded) sunk into a vile
ruffian, the chieftain of a murderous banditti; and that from the
habitual indulgence of the most reprobate habits and ferocious
passions, he had become so changed even in his appearance and features,
"That she who bore him had recoiled from him,
Nor known the alien visage of her child;
Yet still she [Imogine] lov'd him."
She is compelled by the silent entreaties of a father, perishing
with " bitter shameful want on the cold earth," to give her hand,
with a heart thus irrevocably pre-engaged, to Lord Aldobrand, the

<page 335>
334 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
enemy of her lover, even to the very man who had baffled his am-
bitious schemes, and was, at the present time, entrusted with the
execution of the sentence of death which had been passed on Ber-
tram. Now, the proof of " woman's love," so industriously held
forth for the sympathy, if not the esteem of the audience, consists
in this: that though Bertram had become a robber and a murderer
by trade, a ruffian in manners, yea, with form and features at which
his own mother could not but "recoil," yet she, (Lady Imogine,)
"the wife of a most noble, honoured Lord," estimable as a man,
exemplary and affectionate as a husband, and the fond father of
her only child—that she, notwithstanding all this, striking her heart,
dares to say it—
"Bat thou art Bertram's still, and Bertram's ever."
A monk now enters, and entreats in his Prior's name for the wont-
ed hospitality, and " free noble usage," of the Castle of St. Aldo-
brand, for some wretched ship-wrecked souls; and from this we
learn, for the first time, to our infinite surprise, that notwithstanding
the supernaturalness of the storm aforesaid, not only Bertram, but
the whole of his gang, had been saved, by what means we are left
to conjecture, and can only conclude that they had all the same
desperate swimming powers, and the same saving destiny as the
hero, Bertram himself. So ends the first act, and with it the tale
of the events, both those of which the Tragedy begins, and those
which had occurred previous to the date of its commencement.
The second displays Bertram in disturbed sleep, which the Prior,
who hangs over him, prefers calling a "starting trance," and with
a strained voice, that would have awakened one of the seven sleep-
ers, observes to the audience—
"How the lip works! How the bare teeth do grind! And beaded drops course down his writhen brow!" *
The dramatic effect of which passage we not only concede to the
admirers of this Tragedy, but acknowledge the further advantage
-" The big round tears Coursed one another down his innocent nose In piteous chase,"
says Shakspeare of a wounded stag, hanging his head over a stream: naturally,
from the position of the head, and most beautifully, from the association of the
preceding image, of the chase, in which "the poor sequester'd stag from the
hunter's aim had ta'en a hurt" In the supposed position of Bertram, the met-
aphor, if not false, loses all the propriety of the original.

<page 336>
BrOGEAPHIA LITEEARIA. 335
of preparing the audience for the most surprising series of wry
faces, proflated mouths, and lunatic gestures, that were ever
"launched" on an audience to " sear the sense." *
Prior.—"I will awake him from this horrid trance;
This is no natural sleep! Ho! wake thee, stranger."
This is rather a whimsical application of the verb reflex, we must
confess, though we remember a similar transfer of the agent to the
patient in a manuscript Tragedy, in which the Bertram of the piece,
prostrating a man with a single blow of his fist, exclaims—" Knock
me thee down, then ask thee if thou liv'st." Well, the stranger
obeys; and whatever his sleep might have been, his waking was
perfectly natural, for lethargy itself could not withstand the scold-
ing stentorship of Mr. Holland, the Prior. We next learn from
the best authority, his own confession, that the misanthropic hero,
whose destiny was incompatible with drowning, is Count Bertram,
who not only reveals his past fortunes, but avows with open atroci-
ty, his satanic hatred of Imogine's Lord, and his frantic thirst of
revenge; and so the raving character raves, and the scolding char-
acter scolds—and what else? Does not the Prior act? Does he
not send for a posse of constables or thief-takers, to handcuff the
villain, and take him either to Bedlam or Newgate? Nothing of
the kind; the author preserves the unity of character, and the
scolding Prior from first to last does nothing but scold, with the
exception, indeed, of the last scene of the last act, in which, with a
most surprising revolution, he whines, weeps, and kneels to the
condemned blaspheming assassin out of pure affection to the high-
hearted man, the sublimity of whose angel-sin rivals the star-bright
apostate, (i. e. who was as proud as Lucifer, and as wicked as the
Devil,) and " had thrilled him" (Prior Holland aforesaid) with wild
admiration.
"Among a number of other instances of words chosen without reason, Imogine,
in the first act, declares that thunder-storms were not able to intercept her
prayers for."the desperate man, in desperate wayt who dealt"—
"Yea, when the launched bolt did sear her sense,
Her soul's deep orisons were breathed for him;"
i. e. when a red-hot bolt, launched at her from a thunder-cloud, had cauterized
her sense—in plain English, burnt her eyes out of her head, she kept still pray-
ing on.
"Was not this love? Yea, thus doth woman love!

<page 337>
336 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
Accordingly, in the very next scene, we have this tragic Mac-
heath, with his whole gang, in the Castle of St. Aldobrand, without
any attempt on the Prior's part either to prevent him, or to put the
mistress and servants of the Castle on their guard against their
new inmates, though he"(the Prior) knew, and confesses that he
knew, that Bertram's " fearful mates" were assassins so habituated
and naturalized to guilt, that—
"When their drenched hold forsook both gold and gear,
They griped their daggers with a murderer's instinct;"
and though he also knew that.Bertram was the leader of a band
whose trade was blood. To the Castle, however, he goes, thus
with the holy Prior's consent, if not with his assistance; and thither
let us follow him.
No sooner is our hero safely housed in the Castle of St. Aldo-
brand, than he attracts the notice of the lady and her confidante,
by his "wild and terrible dark eyes," "muffled form," "fearful
form," * "darkly wild," "proudly stern," and the like common
place indefinites, seasoned by merely verbal antitheses, and, at best,
copied, with very slight change, from the Conrade of Southey's
Joan of Arc. The lady Imogine, who has been (as is the case,
she tells us, with all soft and solemn spirits) worshipping the moon
on a terrace or rampart within view of the castle, insists on having
an interview with our hero, and this, too, tete-a-tete. Would the
reader learn why and wherefore the confidante is excluded, who
very properly remonstrates against such "conference, alone, at
night, with one who bears such fearful form"—the reason follows—
"why, therefore send him!" I say follows, because the next line,
"all things of fear have lost their power over me," is separated
from the former by a break or pause, and beside that it is a very
poor answer to the danger—is no answer at all to the gross indelicacy of this wilful exposure. We must, therefore, regard it as a
* This sort of repetition is one of this writer's peculiarities, and there is scarce
a page which does not furnish one or more instances—Ex. gr. in the first page or
two. Act I. line 7th, "and deemed that I might sleep."—Line 10, "Did rock and
quiver in the bickering glare."—Lines 14, 15, 16, "But by the momently gleams
of sheeted blue, Did the pale marbles glare so sternly on me, I almost deemed
they lived."—Line 37, "The glare of Hell."—Line 35, "Oholy Prior, this is no
earthly storm"—Line 38, "This is no earthly storm."—Line 42, "Dealing with
us."—Line 43, "Deal thus sternly."—Line 44, "Speak! thou hast something
seen!"—A fearful sight!"—Line 45, "What hast thou seen? A piteous, fearful
sight."—Line 48, "quivering gleams."—Line 50, "In the hollow pauses of the
storm."—Line 61, "Thepauses of the storm," &c.

<page 338>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 337
mere afterthought, that a little softens the rudeness, but adds no-
thing to the weight of that exquisite woman's reason aforesaid.
And so exit Clotilda, and enter Bertram, who "stands without
looking at her," that is, with his lower limbs forked, his arms akim-
bo, his side to the lady's front, the whole figure resembling an in-
verted Y. He is soon, however, roused from the state surly to the
state frantic, and then follow raving, yelling, cursing, she fainting,
he relenting, in run's Imogine's child, squeaks "mother!" He
snatches it up, and with a "God bless-thee, child! Bertram has
kissed thy child,"—the curtain drops. The third act is short, and
short be our account of it. It introduces Lord St. Aldobrand on
his road homeward, and next Imogine in the convent, confessing
the foulness of her heart to the Prior, who first indulges his old
humour with a fit of senseless scolding, then leaves her alone with
her ruffian paramour, with whom she makes at once an infamous
appointment, and the curtain drops, that it may be carried into act
and consummation.
I want words to describe the mingled horror and disgust with
which I witnessed the opening of the fourth act, considering it as
a melancholy proof of the depravation of the public mind. The
shocking spirit of jacobinism seemed no longer confined to poli-
tics. The familiarity with atrocious events and characters ap-
peared to have poisoned the taste, even where it had not directly
disorganized the moral principles, and left the feelings callous to
all the mild appeals, and craving alone for the grossest and most
outrageous stimulants. The very fact then present to our senses,
that a British audience could remain passive under such an insult
to common decency, nay, receive with a thunder of applause, a
human being supposed to have come reeking from the consumma-
tion of this complex foulness and baseness, these and the like re-
flections so pressed as with the weight of lead upon my heart, that
actor, author, and tragedy would have been forgotten, had it not
been for a plain elderly man sitting beside me, who, with a very
serious face, that at once expressed surprise and aversion, touched
my elbow, and pointing to the actor, said to me in a half-whisper—
"Do you see that little fellow there 1 he has just been committing
adultery!" Somewhat relieved by the laugh which this droll ad-
dress occasioned, I forced back my attention to the stage sufficient-
ly to learn, that Bertram is recovered from a transient fit of re-


42

<page 339>
338 BI00RAPH1A LITEEAIUA.
morse, by the information that St. Aldobrand was commissioned
(to do what every honest man must have done without commission,
if be did his duty) to seize him and deliver him to the just ven-
geance of the law; an information which (as he had long known
himself to be an attainted traitor and proclaimed outlaw, and not
only a trader in blood himself, but notoriously the Captain of a
gang of thieves, pirates and assassins) assuredly could not have
been new to him. It is this, however, which alone and instantly
restores him to his accustomed state of raving, blasphemy, and
nonsense. Next follows Imogine's constrained interview with her
injured husband, and his sudden departure again, all in love and
kindness, in order to attend the feast of St. Anselm at the convent.
This was, il must be owned, a very strange engagement for so
tender a husband to make within a few minutes after so long an
absence. But first his lady has told him that she has "a vow on
her," and wishes "that black perdition may gulph her perjured
soul,"—(Note: she is lying at the very time)—if she ascends his
bed till her penance is accomplished. How, therefore, is the poor
husband to amuse himself in this interval of her penance? But do
not be distressed, reader, on account of the St. Aldobrand's ab-
sence! As the author has contrived to send him out of the house,
when a husband would be in his, and the lover's way, so he will
doubtless not be at a loss to bring him back again as soon as he
is wanted. Well! the husband gone in on the one side, out pops
the lover from the other, and for the fiendish purpose of harrowing
up the soul of his wretched accomplice in guilt, by announcing to
her with most brutal and blasphemous execrations, his fixed and
deliberate resolve to assassinate her husband; all this, too, is for
no discoverable purpose, on the part of the author, but that of intro-
ducing a series of super-tragic starts, pauses, screams, struggling,
dagger-throwing, falling on the ground, starting up again wildly,
swearing, outcries for help, falling again on the ground, rising again,
faintly tottering towards the door, and, to end the scene, a most con-
venient fainting fit of our lady's, just in time to give Bertram an op-
portunity of seeking the object of his hatred, before she alarms the
house, which indeed she has had full time to have done before, but
that the author rather chose she should amuse herself and the au-
dience by the above-described ravings and startings. She recovers
slowly, and to her enter Clotilda, the confidante and mother con-

<page 340>
BIOGRAPHIA I-ITERARIA. 339
feasor; then commences what in theatrical language is called the
madness, but which the author more accurately entitles delirium, it
appearing indeed a sort of intermittent fever, with fits of lighthead-
edness off and on, whenever occasion and stage effect happen to
call for it. A convenient return of the storm (we told the reader
before-hand how it would be) had changed
"The rivulet that bathed the Convent walls,
Into a foaming flood; upon its brink The Lord and his small train do stand appalled.
With torch and bell from their high battlements
The monks do summon to the pass in vain;
He must return to-night."—
Talk of the devil, and his horns appear, says the proverb: and
sure enough, within ten lines of the exit of the messenger sent to
stop him, the arrival of Lord St. Aldobrand is announced. Ber-
tram's ruffian band now enter, and range themselves across the
stage, giving fresh cause for Imogine's screams and madness. St.
Aldobrand having received his mortal wound behind the scenes,
totters in to welter in his blood, and to die at the feet of this double-
damned adultress.
Of her, as far as she is concerned in this 4th act, we have two
additional points to notice: first, the low cunning and Jesuitical
trick with which she deludes her husband into words of forgiveness,
which he himself does not understand; and secondly, that every-
where she is made the object of interest and sympathy, and it is
not the author's fault, if at any moment she excites feelings less
gentle than those we are accustomed to associate with the self-ac-
cusations of a sincere, religious penitent. And did a British au-
dience endure all this? They received it with plaudits, which, but
for the rivalry of the carts and hackney coaches, might have dis-
turbed the evening prayers of the scanty week day congregation at
St. Paul's cathedral.
Tempora mutantur, nos et mutamur in illis.
Of the fifth act, the only thing noticeable (for rant and nonsense,
though abundant as ever, have long before the last act, become
things of course) is the profane representation of the high altar in
a chapel, with all the vessels and other preparations for the holy
sacrament. A hymn is actually sung on the stage by the choires-

<page 341>
340 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
ter boys! For the rest, Imogine, who now and then talks deliri-
ously, but who is always light-headed, as far as her gown and hair
can make her so, wanders about in dark woods, with cavern-rocks
and precipices in the back scene; and a number of mute dramatis
persona? move in and out continually, for whose presence there is
always at least this reason, that they afford something to be seen,
by that very large part of a Drury-lane audience, who have small
chance of hearing a word. She had, it appears, taken her child
with her; but what becomes of the child, whether she murdered it
or not, nobody can tell, nobody can learn; it was a riddle at the
representation, and, after a most attentive perusal of the play, a rid-
dle it remains.
"Nomore I know, I wish I did,
And I would tell it all to you;
For what became of this poor child
There's none that ever knew."
Wordsworth's Thorn.
Our whole information* is derived from the following words—
"Prior.—Where is thy child 1.
Cloth..—[Pointing to the cavern into which she had looked] Oh, he lies
cold within his cavern tomb!
Why dost thou urge her with the horrid theme 1
Prior.—[Who will not, the reader may observe, be disappointed of his
dose of scolding,]
It was to make [quere wake] one living cord o' th' heart, And I will try, tho' my own breaks at it.
Where is thy child 1
Imou.—[With a frantic laugh]
The forest-fiend had snatched him—
He [who ? the fiend or the child 1] rides the night-mare through the wizzard woods."
y,_ ■ *..• ■ ■;■..-_ ■---.-■ .--'-"--"•Now, these two lines consist in a senseless plagiarism from the counterfeited madness of Edgar in Lear, who, in imitation of the gipsy incantations, puns on the old word Mair, a Hag; and the no less senseless adoption of Dryden's forest-fiend, and the wizzard stream by which Milton, in his Lysidas, so finely characterizes the spreading Deva, fabulosus Amnis. Observe, too, these images stand unique in the speeches of Imogine, without the slightest re*
* The child is an important personage, for I see not by what possible means the
author could have ended the second and third acts, but for its timely appearance.
How ungrateful, then, not further to notice its fate!

<page 342>
BIOGBAPHIA LITERAMA. 341
semblance to any thing she says before or after. But we are wea-
ry. The characters in this act frisk about, here, there, and every
where, as teazingly as the Jack-o'lanthorn lights which mischievous
boys, from across a narrow street, throw with a looking-glass on
the faces of their opposite neighbours. Bertram disarmed, out-
heroding Charles de Moor in the Robbers, befaces the collected
knights of St. Anselm, (all in complete armour,) and so, by pure
dint of black looks, he out-dares them into passive poltrons. The
sudden revolution in the Prior's manners we have before noticed,
and it is indeed so outre, that a number of the audience imagined
a great secret was to come out, viz. that the Prior was one of the
many instances of a youthful sinner metamorphosed into an old
scold, and that this Bertram would appear at last to be his son.
Imogine re-appears at the convent, and dies of her own accord.
Bertram stabs himself, and dies by her side; and that the play may
conclude as it began, viz. in a superfetation of blasphemy upon
nonsense, because he had snatched a sword from a despicable
coward, who retreats in terror when it is pointed towards him in
sport; this felo de se, and thief-captain, this loathsome and leprous
confluence of robbery, adultery, murder, and cowardly assassina-
tion, this monster, whose best deed is, the having saved his betters
from the degradation of hanging him, by turning Jack Ketch to
himself, first recommends the charitable Monks and holy Prior to
pray for his soul, and then has the folly and impudence to exclaim,
"I died no felon's death, A warrior's weapon freed a warrior's soul!"

<page 343>
CHAPTER XXI V>
'•■•*.■
CONCLUSION*
It sometimes happens that we are punished for our faults by inci»
dents, in the causation of which these faults had no share; and this
I have always felt the severest punishment. The wound, indeed,
is of the same dimensions; but the edges are jagged, and there is
a dull under-pain that survives the smart which it had aggravated.
For there is always a consolatory feeling that accompanies the
sense of a proportion between antecedents and consequents. The
sense of before and after becomes both intelligible and intellectual
when, and only when, we contemplate the succession in the rela-
tions of cause and effect, which like the two poles in the magnet,
manifest the being and unity of the one power by relative opposites,
and give, as it were, a substratum of permanence, of identity, and,
therefore, of reality to the shadowy flux of time. It is eternity, revealing itself in the phenomena of time; and the perception and
acknowledgment of the proportionality and appropriateness of the
present to the past, prove to the afflicted soul, that it has not yet
been deprived of the sight of God; that it can still recognise the
effective presence of a Father, though through a darkened glass
and a turbid atmosphere, though of a Father that is chastising it.
And for this cause, doubtless, are we so framed in mind, and even
so organized in brain and nerve, that all confusion is painful. It is
within the experience of many medical practitioners, that a patient,
with strange and unusual symptoms of disease, has been more dis-
tressed in mind, more wretched from the fact of being unintelligible
to himself and others, than from the pain or danger of the disease;
nay, that the patient has received the most solid comfort, and resu-
med a genial and enduring cheerfulness, from some new symptom
or product, that had at once determined the name and nature of
his complaint, and rendered it an intelligible effect of an intelligible
cause; even though the discovery did at the same moment preclude
all hope of restoration. Hence the mystic theologians, whose de-
lusions we may more confidently hope to separate from their actual
intuitions, when we condescend to read their works without the

<page 344>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERAIUA. 343
presumption that whatever our fancy, (always the ape, and too often
the adulterator and counterfeit of our memory) has not made or
cannot make a picture of, must be nonsense; hence, I say, the Mys-
tics have joined in representing the state of the reprobate spirits as
a dreadful dream in which there is no sense of reality, not even of the
pangs they are enduring—an eternity without time, and, as it were,
below it—God present, without manifestation of his presence. But
these are depths which we dare not linger over. Let us turn to an
instance more on a level with the ordinary sympathies of mankind.
Here, then, and in this same healing influence of light and distinct
beholding, we may detect the final cause of that instinct which, in
the great majority of instances, leads and almost compels the afflict-
ed to communicate their sorrows. Hence, too, flows the allevia-
tion that results from "opening out our griefs;" which are thus
presented in distinguishable forms instead of the mist through which
whatever is shapeless becomes magnified and (literally) enormous.
Casimir, in the fifth ode of his third book, has happily expressed
this thought.*
Me longus silendi Edit amor; facilisque Luctus
Ilausit medullas. Fugerit ocius,
Simul negantem visere jusseris
Aures amicorum, et loquacem
, Questibus evacuaris iram.
Olim qucrendo desinimus queri,
Ipsoque fletu lacryma perditur,
Nee fortis a?que, si per omnes
Cura volet residetque ramos.
Vires amicis perdit in auribus
Minorque semper dividitur dolor Per multa permUsus vogari
Pectora.—
Id. Lib. III. Od. 5.
. *
* Classically, too, as far as consists with the allegorizing fancy of the modern,
that still striving to project the inward, contra-distinguishes itself from the seem-
ing ease with which the poetry of the ancients reflects the world without. Casi-
mir affords, perhaps, the most striking instance of this characteristic difference;
for his style and diction are really classical, while Cowley, who resembles Casi-
mir in many respects, completely barbarizes his Latinity, and even his metre,
by the heterogeneous nature of his thoughts. That Dr. Johnson should have
passed a contrary judgment, and have even preferred Cowley's Latin poems to
Milton's, is a caprice that has, if I mistake not, excited the surprise of all schol-
ars. I was much amused last summer with the laughable affright with which an
Italian poet perused a page of Cowley's Davideis, contrasted with the enthusiasm
with which he first ran through, and then read aloud, Milton's Mansus and Ad
Patrem.

<page 345>
344 BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
I shall not make this an excuse, however, for troubling my read-
ers with any complaints or explanations, with which, as readers,
they have little or no concern. It may suffice, (for the present at
least) to declare that the causes that have delayed the publication
of these volumes for so long a period after they had been printed
off, were not connected with any neglect of my own; and that they
would form an instructive comment on the chapter concerning au-
thorship as a trade, addressed to young men of genius in the first
volume of this work. I remember the ludicrous effect which the
first sentence of an auto-biography, which, happily for the writer,
was as meagre in incidents as it is well possible for the life of an
individual to be—" The eventful life which I am about to record,
from the hour in which I rose into exist on this planet," &c.
Yet when, notwithstanding this warning example of self importance
before me, I review my own life, I cannot refrain from applying the
same epithet to it, and with more than ordinary emphasis—and no
private feeling, that affected myself only, should prevent me from
publishing the same, (for write it I assuredly shall, should life and
leisure be granted me) if continued reflection should strengthen my
present belief, that my history would add its contingent to the en-
forcement of one important truth, viz. that we must not only love
our neighbours as ourselves, but ourselves likewise as our neigh-
bours; and that we can do neither, unless we love God above both.
Who lives that's not
Depraved or depraves? Wbo dies, that bears
Not one spurn to the grave-^of their friends' gift?
Strange as the delusion may appear, yet it is most true, that three
years ago I did not know or believe that I had an enemy in the
world; and now, even my strongest sensations of gratitude are
mingled with fear, and I reproach myself for being too often-dis-
posed to ask—Have I one friend ?—During the many years which
intervened between the composition and the publication of the
Christable, it became almost as well known among literary men, as
if it had been on common sale; the same references were made to
it, and the same liberties taken with it, even to the very names of
the imaginary persons in the poem. From almost all of our most
celebrated Poets, and from some with whom I had no personal ac-
quaintance, I either received or heard of expressions of admiration

<page 346>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 34$
that (I can truly say) appeared to myself utterly disproportionate to
a work that pretended to be nothing more than a common Faery
Tale. Many, who had allowed no merit to my other poems, wheth-
er printed or manuscript, and who have frankly told me as much,
uniformly made an exception in favour of the Christabel and the
Poem entitled Love. Year after year, and in societies of the most
different kinds, I had been entreated to recite it; and the result was
still the same in all, and altogether different in this respect from the effect produced by the occasional recitation of any other poems I
had composed.—This before the publication. And since then,
with very few exceptions, I have heard nothing but abuse, and this
too in a spirit of bitterness at least as disproportionate to the preten-
sions of the poem, had it been the most pitiably below mediocrity,
as the previous eulogies, and far more inexplicable. In the Edin-
burgh Review, it was assailed with a malignity and a spirit of per-
sonal hatred that ought to have injured only the work in which such
a tirade was suffered to appear; and this review was generally at-
tributed (whether rightly or no I know not) to a man who, both in
my presence and in my absence, has frequently pronounced it the
finest poem of its kind in the language. This may serve as a warn-
ing to authors, that in their calculations on the probable reception
of a poem, they must subtract to a large amount from the panegyric;
which may have encouraged them to publish it, however unsuspi-
cious and however various the sources of this panegyric may have
been. And, first, allowances must be made for private enmity, of
the very existence of which they had perhaps entertained no suspi-
cion—for personal enmity behind the mask of anonymous criti-
cism: secondly, for the necessity of a certain proportion of abuse
and ridicule in a Review, in order to make it saleable; in conse-
quence of which, if they have no friends behind the scenes, the
chance must needs be against them; but lastly, and chiefly, for the
excitement and temporary sympathy of feeling, which the recitation
of the poem by an admirer, especially if he be at once a warm admi-
rer and a man of acknowledged celebrity, calls forth in the audi-
ence. For this is really a species of Animal Magnetism, in which
the enkindling Reciter by perpetual comment of looks and tones,
lends his own will and apprehensive faculty to his Auditors. They
live for the time within the dilated sphere of his intellectual Being.
It is equally possible, though not equally common, that a reader

43

<page 347>
346 BIOGKAPHIA LITEKARIA.
left to himself should sink below the poem, as that the poem left to
itself should flag beneath the feelings of the reader.—But in my
own instance, I had the additional misfortune of having been gos- sipped about, as devoted to metaphysics, and worse than all, to a
system incomparably nearer to the visionary flights of Plato, and
even to the jargon of the mystics, than to the established tenets of
Locke. Whatever, therefore, appeared with my name, was con-
demned before hand, as predestined metaphysics. In a dramatic
poem, which had been submitted by me to a gentleman of great in-
fluence in the Theatrical world, occurred the following passage :—
O we are querulous creatures! Little leas
Than all things can suffice to make us happy :■
And little more than nothing is enough
To make us wretched.
Aye, here now! (exclaimed the Critic) here come Coleridge's
Metaphysics I And the very same motive (that is, not that the
lines were unfit for the present state of our immense Theatres, but
that they were Metaphysics*) was assigned elsewhere for the rejection of the two following passages. The first is spoken in an-
swer to a usurper, who had rested his plea on the circumstance,
that he had been chosen by the acclamations of the people:—
What people? How convened? Or if conven'd,
Must not that magic power that charms together
Millions of men in council, needs have power
To win or wield them? Rather, O far rather,
Shout forth thy titles to yon circling mountains,
And with a thousandfold reverberation
Make the rocks flatter thee, and the volleying ail,
Unbribed, shout back to thee, King Emerich!
■By wholesome laws to embank the Sovereign Power; |
To deepen by restraint; and by prevention Of lawless will to amass and guide the flood
In its majestic channel, is man's task And the true patriot's glory! In all else
Men safelier trust to Heaven, than to themselves
When least themselves i even in those whirling crowds
Where folly is contagious, and too oft
Even wise men leave their better sense at home
To chide and wonder at them when return'd,
* Poor unlucky Metaphysics! and what are they J A single sentence ex-
presses the object and thereby the contents of this science. Pvwot seauTov .
et Deum quantum licet et in Deo omnia scibis. Know thyself: and so shalt thou
know God, as far as is permitted to a creature, and in God all things.—Surety,
there is a strange—nay, rather a too natural, aversion in many to www them-
selves.


<page 348>
BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA.
The second passage is in the mouth of an old and experienced
Courtier, betrayed by the man in whom he had most trusted.
And yet Sarolta, simple, inexperienced, Could see him as he was and.oft has warned me. Whence learnt she this 1 O she was innocent. And to be innocent is Nature's wisdom. The fledge dove knows the prowlers of the air, Fear'd soon as seen, and flutters back to shelter!And the young steed recoils upon his haunches, The never-yet-seen adder's hiss first heard!Ah! surer than suspicion's hundred eyes Is that fine sense, which to the pure in heart By mere oppugnancy of their own goodness Reveals the approach of evil! . .
As, therefore, my character as a writer could not easily be more
injured by an overt-act than it was already in consequence of the
report, I published a work, a large portion of which was professedly
metaphysical. A long delay occurred between its first annuncia-
tion and its appearance; it was reviewed therefore, by anticipation,
with a malignity, so avowedly and exclusively personal, as is, I be-
lieve, unprecedented even in the present contempt of all common
humanity that disgraces and endangers the liberty of the press.
After its appearance, the author of this lampoon was chosen to re-
view it in the Edinburgh Review j and under the single condition,
that he should have written what he himself really thought, and have
criticised the work as he would have done had its author been in-
different to him, I should have chosen that man myself both from
the vigour and the originality of his mind, and from his particular
acuteness in speculative reasoning, before all others. I remem-
bered Catullus's 'lines,
>Desine de quoquam quicquam bene velle mereri,
Xut aliquem fieri posse putare pium.
Omnia sunt ingrata: nihil fecisse benigne est:
Into, etiam taedet, tsedet obestque magis.
Ut mini, quern nemogravius nee aceribus urget
Quam, modo qui me unum atque unicum amicum habuit.
But I can truly say, that the grief with which I read this rhapso-
dy of premeditated insult, had the Rhapsodist himself for its whole
and sole object: and that the indignant contempt which it excited
in me was as exclusively confined to his employer and suborner.
I refer to this Review at present, in consequence of information

<page 349>
348 BIOGRAPHM LITERARIA.
having been given me, that the innuendo of my " potential infideli-
ty," grounded on one passage of my first Lay Sermon, has been
received and propagated with a degree of credence, of which I can
safely acquit the originator of the calumny. I give the sentences
as they stand in the sermon, premising only, that I was speaking
exclusively of miracles worked for the outward senses of men.
"It was only to overthrow the usurpation exercised in and through
the senses, that the senses were miraculously appealed to. Rea-
son and Religion are their own evidence. The natural sun
is in this respect a symbolof the spiritual. Ere he is fully arisen,
and while his glories are still under veil, he calls up the breeze
to chase away the usurping vapors of the night season, and thus
converts the air itself into the minister of its own purification: not surely in proof or elucidation of the light from heaven, but to pre-
vent its interception.
"Wherever, therefore, similar circumstances co-exist with the
same moral causes, the principles revealed, and the examples re-
corded, in the inspired writings, render miracles superfluous: and
if we neglect to apply truths in expectation of wonders, or under
pretext of the cessation of the latter, we tempt God, and merit the
same reply which our Lord gave to the Pharisees on a like occa-
sion."
In the sermon and the notes, both the historical truth and the ne-
cessity of the miracles are strongly and frequently asserted. "The
testimony of books of history, (i. e. relatively to the signs and won-
ders with which Christ came) is one of the strong and stately pillars
of the church; but it is not the foundation!" Instead, therefore,
of defending myself, which I could easily effect by a series of pas-
sages, expressing the same opinion, from the Fathers, and the most
eminent Protestant Divines from the Reformation to the Revolu-
tion, I shall merely state here, what my belief is, concerning the
true evidences of Christianity. 1. Its consistency with right Rea-
son, I consider as the outer Court of the Temple, the common area,
within which it stands. 2. The miracles, with and through which
the Religion was first revealed and attested, I regard as the steps,
the vestibule, and the portal of the Temple. 3. The sense, the in-
ward feeling, in the soul of each believer of its exceeding desirable-
ness—the experience that he needs something, joined with the strong
foretokening, that the Redemption and the Graces propounded to

<page 350>
B166RAPHIA LITERAR1A. 349
Ws in Christ, are what he needs;—this I hold to be the true Foun-
dation of the spiritual Edifice. With the strong a priori proba-
bility that flows in from 1 and 3 on the correspondent historical
evidence of 2, no man can refuse or neglect to make the experi-
ment without guilt. But 4, it is the experience derived from a
practical conformity to the conditions of the Gospel—it is the open-
ing Eye; the dawning Light; the terrors and the promises of spir-
itual Growth; the blessedness of loving God as God, the nascent
sense of Sin hated as Sin, and of the incapability of attaining to
either without Christ; it is the sorrow that still rises up from be-
neath, and the consolation that meets it from above; the bosom
treacheries of the Principal in the warfare, and the exceeding faith-
fulness and long suffering of the uninterested Ally;—in a word, it
is the actual Trial of the Faith in Christ, with its accompaniments
and results, that must form the arched Roof, and Faith itself is the
completing Key-stone. In order to an efficient belief in Chris-
tianity, a man must have been a Christian, and this is the seeming
argumentum in circulo, Incident to all spiritual Truths, to every
subject not presentable under the forms of Time and Space, as
long as we attempt to master by the reflex acts of the Understand-
ing, what we can only know by the act of becoming. "Do the
will of my father, and ye shall know whether I am of God." These
four evidences I believe to have been, and still to be, for the world,
for the whole Church, all necessary, all equally necessary; but
that at present, and for the majority of Christians born in Christian
countries, I believe the third and the fourth evidences to be the
most operative, not as superseding, but as involving a glad un-
doubting faith in the two former. Credidi, indeoque intellexi, ap-
pears to me the dictate equally of Philosophy and Religion, even as
I believe Redemption to be the antecedent of Sanctification, and
not its consequent. All spiritual predicates may be construed in-
differently as modes of Action, or as states of Being. Thus Holi-
ness and Blessedness are the same idea, now seen in relation to act,
and now to existence. The ready belief which has been yielded
to the slander of my " potential infidelity," I attribute in part to the
openness with which I have avowed my doubts, whether the heavy
interdict, under which the name of Benedict Spinoza lies, is mer-
ited on the whole, or to the whole extent. Be this as it may, I wish,
however, that I could find in the books of philosophy, theoretical or

<page 351>
350 BIOGRAPHIC LITERARIA.
moral, which are alone recommended to the present students of
Theology in our established schools, a few passages as thoroughly
Pauline, as completely accordant with the doctrines of the established Church, as the following sentences in the concluding page of
Spinoza's Ethics. Deinde quo mens amore divino seu beatitudine
magis gaudet, eo plus intelligit, eo majorem in affectus habet po-
tentiam, et eo minus ab affcctibus, qui mali sunt, patitur: atque
adeo ex eo, quod mens hoc amore divino seu beatitudine gaudet,
potestatem habet libidines coercendi, nemo beatitudine gaudet quia
affectus coercuit; sed contra potestfts librdiries coercendi ex ipsa
beatitudine oritur. , *
With regard to the Unitarians, it has been shamelessly asserted,
that I have denied them to be Christians. God forbid! For how
should I know what the piety of the heart may be, or what quantum
of error in the understanding may consist with a saving faith in the
intentions and actual dispositions of the whole moral being in any
one individual 1 Never will God reject a soul that sincerely loves
him, be his speculative opinions what they may; and whether in
any given instance certain opinions, be they unbelief or misbelief,
are compatible with a sincere love of God, God only can know.
But this I have said, and shall continue to say; that if the doctrines,
the sum of which I believe to constitute the truth in Christ, be Chris-
tianity, then Unitarianum is not, and vice versa: and that in speak-
ing theologically and impersonally, i. e. of Psilanthropism and
Theanthropism as schemes of belief, without reference to individ-
uals who profess either the one or the other, it will be absurd to use
a different language as long as it is the dictate of common sense,
that two opposites cannot properly be called by the same name. I
should feel no offence if an Unitarian applied the same to me, any
more than if he were to say, that 2 and 2 being 4,4 and 4 must be 8.
AXXa ^Syoruv
Tov |«v xsvo<ppovsj au^ai
EJ ayaSuv s^3aXov.
Tov & a\i xarafAEfMpSsvr' ayav
isxyv oixsiwv xarsjqjaXev xaXuv
Xeijoj sXxwv otfijsu, ©u/ioj aroXfAoj.
This has been my object, and this alone can be my defence— and O! that with this my personal as well as my literary life

<page 352>
BIOGRAFHIA LITERARIA. 351
might conclude! the unquenched desire I mean, not without the
consciousness of having earnestly endeavored to kindle young
minds, and to guard them against the temptations of Scorners, by
showing that the Scheme of Christianity, as taught in the Liturgy
and Homilies of our Church, though not discoverable by human
Reason, is yet in accordance with it; that link follows link by ne-
cessary consequence; that Religion passes out of the ken of rea-
son only where the eye of reason has reached its own horizon; and
that faith is then but its continuation: even as the day softens away
into the sweet twilight, and twilight, hushed and breathless, steals
into the darkness. It is night, sacred night! the upraised eye
views only the starry heaven which manifests itself alone; and the
outward beholding is fixed on the sparks twinkling in the awful
depth, though suns of other worlds, only to preserve the soul steady
and collected in its pure act of inward adoration to the great I AM,
and to the filial Word that re-affirmeth it from eternity to eternity,
whose choral echo is the universe.
0EO MONO AOSA.

<page 353>

ERRATA.
Page 144, read the Greek passages in the note, as follows:
r\ Sw guiisW; on n ysvfyurvoy iji hiapa. <fc°». Siu*iiS'S (mattem, &(fef*a
%S siu*ug^c) xai <pisei ysvo>evov Ss£jpi)|uw», xai ftoi ymphr) sx Stsuplag
mis iiSl rr)v q>igiv l^siv piXo&safwva uwapxsi (maWem, vai (xoi 'q yfivo/liv*)
£x Sswpiag aW5j£ uii'f.)
ftiig 'ipa, A^ijra Tovrj.
Page 147, read the lines from Synesius as follows:
* Ev xai Xloivra—taken by itself) is Spinosism.
■ Ev o' 'Atfavruv—a mere aroma Mundi.
'Ev rs tfpo iravruv—is mechanical Theism.
A few other typographical errors occur which the reader will be able to correct.
Owing to the imperfection of our fount of Greek type, and the difficulty of sup-
plying the deficiency at the time it was wanted, we have ventured to use the final
S in all the Greek passages, instead of the proper Sigma.

<page 354>

<page 355>
all*
DATE DUE
fltto*
«*■
WW
CATLORO
PIIINTEO IN U.S.A. |

<page 356>
CX 000 3?a flS4

■

<page 357>


<page 358>
