 
  
 THE FAMILY PICTURE. 
 
 INTRODUCTION. 
 DIALOGUE I. 
 Mr. EGERTON, Mr. FORRESTER. 
 
 Mr. FORRESTER. 
 YOU are certainly a very happy Man, Sir. Happy in your fortune, happy in your Friends, and particularly happy in your Family. Whence is it that your children have acquired such an evident superiority over the young people of their own age? I, you know, am but lately come to settle in this neighbourhood. Reserve, the characteristic of an Englishman, I have in a very strong degree, except when I converse with you; but in your society, though I am conscious you are my superior, I seem to breathe and act with greater freedom. You banish my restraint, you enliven my
 
imagination: though almost a stranger to you, I can ask you questions with the confidence of intimacy, and can be of a different opinion, without any apprehension of offending you. With you I become unembarrassed, and acquire an ease and propriety that no where else seem so natural to me. How does this happen? Nay, your presence seems to influence every thing. The scenery is particularly chearful and beautiful in this place; and the spot you have chosen for yourself, is the paradise of delight. Such variety, such a charming assemblage of hill and dale, river, brook and clear spring, wood and shady grove, that I declare I fancy myself in the regions of romance, and am inclined to be poetical when I visit you. In short, Sir, I admire you, and am afraid I should be tempted to envy any other man in such a situation. But I want to be informed of the reason of all this. Why should your arrangements be more happy, your servants in better decorum, and your children more accomplished than others? explain these things to me. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Without any affectation of modesty, Sir, I confess that I believe what you say, in part, to be true. Your fancy is lively, and has heightened the colouring, but, in general, I am of opinion that my family, my affairs, and my enjoyments of life, are different, and in some respects superior, to that of
 
others. But this will not appear so wonderful, when the habits and events that have concurred to make them so are known; and the shortest manner of doing this, will be to relate the principal occurrences of my life to give you, in a concise way, my history. 
 Though I was the youngest child of a numerous family, and consequently was possessed of but little wealth to begin the world with, yet I had one advantage to which I attribute all my subsequent success; I had the instruction, the experience, and the wisdom of an affectionate father, to guide and direct me till I was fourteen. At this age, having lost my parents, though I had guardians, I became less circumspect. Being of a warm and enterprizing temper, and feeling myself superior to the generality of my young companions, schemes of independence began to revolve in my mind. I observed the silly actions of men, and drew inferences favourable to my own prudence and capacity: those to whom I was left in charge had weaknesses; I saw them and became impatient of controul. As I grew towards manhood, my mind became restless, my imagination was heated by reading the strong sentiments and great actions of the ancient heroes. The successful career of young Scipio charmed and fired my fancy: I panted to be distinguished, and neglected no opportunity that could render me remarkable; as the following incident will convince you. 
 I was educated at Eton School and observing, one day, two of my school-fellows insulting a
 
poor woman, that was tottering under age, it excited my indignation so much, that I fell upon them both very heartily, and struck one of them an unlucky blow. They conceiving I had injured them, by interfering in a business that did not concern me, and not being able to conceal their disgrace, complained to the master, and made up a story greatly to their own advantage. I was accordingly summoned to answer for myself. It happened that I had just before been reading the tale of the Spartan Boy that expired while the fox was biting him. In consequence of this, having at that instant a thorough contempt for pain, and indeed wishing for an opportunity to shew how much I despised it, I behaved sullenly, and refused to answer the master, except by haughtily declaring, I had done what I thought was right, and would, with the like provocation, do the same again. This, exclusive of the crime I stood accused of, was braving the authority of the master, who ordered me to be severely punished; which was what I wished and expected. I supported the pain as if I had been insensible to it, and then told the master that he was mistaken, if he supposed me capable of fearing any punishment that he, or the worst of tyrants could inflict; I had done my duty by relieving age and imbecility from the wanton cruelty of two boys, and if he had done justice he would have punished them instead of me. The master, who was a sensible and discerning
 
man, replied "there is something peculiar in your conduct, young gentleman, it must be confessed, but you do wrong in accusing me of tyranny. You have behaved with audacity, and if I should suffer such ill manners to go unpunished, it would be impossible for me to preserve any order in this place. If, as you now say, you took the part of the oppressed, you should have condescended to have said so, when I questioned you at first. I speak thus to you, Sir, because you seem, from what I have observed of your present and your former behaviour, to think something deeper, and see a little further than people of your age usually do, but you do not see far enough. I am no tyrant, young Sir; you have been very rude, and though I have some hope it proceeded from a good, though mistaken motive, yet, had I not resented it, I should have acted inconsistently, and have degraded my situation. Recollect yourself, and if you have as much sense as I believe you to have, you will see your error." 
 This cool address not only shewed me how wrong I had been, in not explaining myself, but quite overcame me. I burst into tears, fell upon my knees, and, as soon as I could speak, asked his pardon for having used such an injurious epithet to him. I then related the story of the old woman and my school-fellows, simply as it happened, together with my heroic imitation of the Spartan Boy. The master who was evidently surprized and affected by my manner and conduct in this affair, said to
 
me, "Mr. Egerton, I am sorry I have degraded you by the punishment you have suffered; you are an extraordinary young gentleman, and I have no doubt will one day become an ornament to society. Let me, however, caution you against your passions, they are very powerful, and while they persuade you that you are doing something uncommonly great, or good, may lead you into very dangerous mistakes. This fortitude and contempt of pain at your age, would have been beyond praise, had they been exerted upon a proper occasion; as it is, they can only be admired, but your generous protection of the helpless deserves every reward and encouragement, and I hope you will hereafter consider me as your friend, and not your master. As for your accusers, there is no punishment I can inflict severe enough for cruelty, cowardice and lying; I shall therefore expel them, left their example should corrupt others. I perceive you are going to intercede for them: but I will spare you the pain of being refused, by telling you, I cannot, in justice to the other young gentlemen that are entrusted to my care, suffer boys of such vicious dispositions to associate with them. Youth is weak and inconsiderate, and as liable to imitate a bad as a good action; it is my particular duty therefore not to permit these wicked boys to remain among them." 
 I have related this adventure, to shew you the natural warmth and enthusiastic bent of my temper.
 
I went through a regular course of education under the gentleman above-mentioned, whose friendship I possessed till his death, and to whose advice and instruction I am greatly indebted. It was the intention of my guardians that I should study the law, and become a counsellor; I however had other views; for though it is certain, no profession requires greater acuteness and abilities than this, yet as it is become common place to call it dry, tedious, knavish and so forth, it was little alluring to a mind like mine, that had so strong a propensity to romance. I wanted to be a hero, or a poet, or rather a something supernatural, and it was experience only that could make me more rational. By my repeated intercessions and positiveness in refusing to engage in any other vocation, my guardians were prevailed upon to buy me a commission in the army; and I entered it with an incoherent kind of hope of doing extraordinary things; but I had not been in it long before I discovered that more of mechanism than courage was required: that I must obey orders, and pay a strict regard to trifles: that in order to rise to any very superior station, I must not only have abilities, but powerful friends; and that without them it was as probable I should remain obscure in this, as in any other profession. I was at the battle of Fontenoy, and, though I encouraged the men under my command, and executed the orders I received with the utmost ardor, yet I was convinced it was very little in the power of an individual to
 
turn the fortune of the day, for notwithstanding all my heroism, I was wounded and taken prisoner. Some time after I was exchanged and sent to England, when it was my fortune to fall deeply in love with my present wife. 
 Hitherto I had cared but little about riches, nay indeed as the poets and philosophers I had read usually affected to despise them, I did so too, my amour however brought me to a severe sense of the want of them. My mistress was the daughter of a very rich man, and an heiress; I, a younger brother with a small fortune, rather diminished than increased; and as the peace and half-pay had deprived me of any further hopes from the army, I had no apparent means of augmenting my wealth. This made me reflect on the absurdity of those visionary hopes in the contemplation of which I had formerly indulged myself. I began to perceive there was no arriving at perfection in any art, or knowledge, or eminence in any station, but by gradual and almost imperceptible degrees; my passion was violent, I saw no probable means of obtaining a fortune instantaneously, nor of gaining the woman I loved without one. The father of Mrs. Egerton suspected our love, which was mutual, and hinted, in an oblique manner, that he did not wish to see me any more at his house. After turning every kind of scheme in my mind, I concluded that the most expeditious way of becoming wealthy, would be by going into the service of the East India Company; which, after consulting with
 
Mrs. Egerton, and having exchanged reiterated promises of fidelity, I resolved to do. 
 My family connections and the money I could command to begin with, gave the means of going out in a respectable light: and I embarked, though with an aching heart, not without hopes of returning to enjoy the fruits of my industry and love. I was abroad about three years, during which time I gained a considerable fund of worldly knowledge, and an insight in the ways, motives and manners of men. The facts were some of them not very much to their honour, but they taught me to think more consistently. I do not mean by this to censure the men of the world universally; there are many, within my own knowledge, of the strictest probity, but these I have observed never, unless by some accident, become suddenly rich. For my own part, I made but moderate advances, and this slow progress, with the letters I received from Mrs. Egerton, and the continual anxiety of so long an absence, made me resolve to return. When I arrived in England, I found I had a legacy left me by a relation. This, added to my little stock, made, in the whole, almost eleven thousand pounds; for I had been as strict an oeconomist, while in India, as the natural warmth of my temper would permit me to be: but there are weak, indolent and unfortunate men in all places, that must ever be a tax on the more industrious and successful, who have some pity, some generosity, and no excessive degree of selfishness, among
 
which number I hope I shall always remain: for though it is encumbent on every man to be prudent and assiduous, yet while I feel I have many weaknesses myself, I trust I shall always have philanthropy enough to look with an eye of pity on those of others, though I neither wish to encourage theirs nor my own. 
 We are always apt enough to indulge hopes of success when we wish it. I could not summon up the courage to wait on Mrs. Egerton's father and explain myself to him in person. I knew my fortune, tho' in this its improved state, was by no means equal to what he had a right to expect from the husband of his daughter. But as my family was respectable, and as I had used such efforts to make myself more worthy, I supposed it possible, when these things were enumerated, that they might have some influence on the mind of the old gentleman: for which reason I resolved to write to him, and tell him what I had done for his daughter's-sake, and what I would do if he would but permit her to be mine. I did so, and soon received for answer the painful mortification of a positive refusal, which threw me into a state of despair that had like to have proved fatal to me. An accident however accomplished that which all my former efforts had failed to do. I received intelligence from Mrs. Egerton that her father was going into the country, under the pretence of taking her to enjoy the beauties of the spring, but in reality to keep her from the
 
sight of me. I no sooner heard this, but I resolved to ride after them at a distance, to follow them down, and to disguise myself and live in the neighbourhood while they should remain there. It was fortunate for her father that I did so. I communicated my scheme to Mrs. Egerton, and though she dissuaded me from putting it in practice, it was in a way that shewed she but half disapproved my intention. I therefore executed my plan, by taking the dress of an ordinary tradesman, hiring a lodging in the neighbourhood, and pretending I was ordered by the physicians to live some time in the country for a change of air, as being apprehensive of falling into a consumption; and, as ill health always attends any extraordinary agitation of the mind, I had a temporary paleness and dejection that made this pretext very plausible. I had given Mrs. Egerton so many proofs of the purity of my intentions, and the strict honour by which I was actuated, that I had prevailed on her, while in town, to admit me to converse with her, in the presence of her maid, in an evening, when her father was gone to rest: and this, in consequence of the pressing earnestness of my solicitations, was repeated in the country. One evening, about midnight, when the whole house except Mrs. Egerton and her maid was gone to bed, and every thing was still and silent, as we were sitting indulging our melancholy, and renewing those protestations of constancy which lovers never think can be often enough repeated, we heard a
 
noise over our heads, in the chamber where her father slept, as of persons walking without their shoes. We were all alarmed, Mrs. Egerton particularly, who exclaimed "Good God! there is somebody in my father's room, going to murder him perhaps." We listened, and presently heard persons speaking in a low voice, who were answered by the old gentleman; this was almost immediately succeeded by a noise of struggling, and the father's begging for God's sake that they would spare his life. I instantly snatched up the poker and the candle, flew up stairs and burst open the door, where I beheld the old gentleman gasping for breath, beneath two villains who were endeavouring to strangle him. My appearance was so sudden, and the force of guilt so strong, that I made an easy conquest. The house was instantly alarmed by the cries of Mrs. Egerton and her maid, and the servants coming to my assistance, the assassins were bound and secured. It appeared they were dissolute fellows in the neighbourhood. They had crept into the house, concealed themselves under the bed, waited till they supposed every body gone to rest, and then, after having obliged the old gentleman to deliver his keys, endeavoured to strangle him, lest he should wake his servants before they could accomplish their purpose. The horror of the attempt made so strong an impression upon his mind, that when he came to himself, and saw his deliverer, he wept, embraced me, clasped my hand, blessed me, called me his son, his best son, his preserver,
 
and seemed delighted that he could, in some measure, bestow a recompence for the service I had done him by giving me his daughter. 
 You may easily imagine the temporary flow of happiness that succeeded; it was all rapture, love, gratitude, thanks, acknowledgements and congratulations. But these violent delights cannot long exist; they have too often as Shakespeare expresses it, violent ends Romeo and Juliet. . This, however, happily, has not been my case: they have subsided into a calm and temperate tranquility. New scenes opened upon me. I became a father, when the anxieties of a parent, with the experience I had had, soon made me regard my former visionary schemes in a more sober and rational light. It is true, they left a warm glow upon my mind, that has always kept it alive to certain sensations, which those who have once possessed never wish entirely to lose. It has enlarged my ideas, and given me a habit of extending my views to objects, that with some people, are out of sight. I encourage the effusions of fancy, I remember the agreeable dreams of my youth with pleasure, and some of them I have realized. 
 One of my chief cares has been the education of my children. I can never forget the strong impression reading made upon me, when very young. This, I am convinced, may be turned to the greatest advantage, by those who have the care of youth. Moral tales, well told, in which the good and ill effects of the passions are conspicuous, have a greater
 
influence over the conduct of the youthful mind, and will do more in the improvement of the heart, than punishment or advice can ever effect. We are the creatures of imitation, and our most prevalent passion is vanity. This is the rein by which the skilful instructor should guide his pupil. Till a certain age, fear and correction should have their influence; after that, praise and example will be most prevalent. This, at least, is my opinion. For this reason, I have adopted the method I use at present. I have formed a reading society among my own family. My children assemble every day in the library. History and biography are the great resources, as these furnish continual and real examples of the effects of the passions; to these are added, such tales of fiction as I think well calculated to point out the good or ill consequences of particular virtues and vices. It has been a constant source of delight to me, to observe the progress of the mind, and the natural propensity of the human heart to rectitude and virtue. I have five children, three boys and two girls, the eldest is nineteen, and the youngest eight. They have all been educated at home, because I have been afraid of their contracting the bad habits of their companions, had I sent them to schools. I am sensible this mode of education has its disadvantages, but as it has been the business and the delight of myself and Mrs. Egerton, to apply ourselves to this, and this only, and as we have been fortunate in finding men of genius to
 
assist us in the task, I am inclined to suppose we have avoided many of the inconveniences, and supplied some of the defects. 
 There is one thing we have been particularly attentive to, which is candour. We have always spoken our sentiments with simplicity and sincerity. We have never disguised our meaning by endeavouring to deceive a child into virtue; for we believe all deceit to have a dangerous tendency. We have encouraged truth and openness, and taken every possible precaution to detect, punish and expose the contrary. We have talked to our children rather as friends than masters, and have become their confidants; for as we have never expected perfection, but have been always ready to forgive errors that have been ingenuously confessed, prevarication and falshood, after a certain age, have seldom been attempted by our pupils. It is in consequence of such methods, that our little society has acquired an air of freedom and simplicity, that cannot exist where artifice is not despised. There is a natural aversion in the mind to confess its foibles. Vanity is continually intent upon drawing comparisons in its own favour, and this principle is inseparable from humanity. To correct it, to make the mind open to conviction, and willing to observe and detect its real motives, is peculiarly the duty of teachers. Estimable as scientific knowledge is, this knowledge is far more estimable, because upon this depends our happiness, and the execution of all the social duties. 
 Our family meet every evening, (except interrupted by being visited, or going to visit) in the library; which is very commodiously adapted for either a summer or a winter room. There are folding doors that open to the park. In the front is an extensive and variegated landscape, which includes some of the most beautiful scenery that this part of England affords. On the right is a stupendous craggy rock, that projects from the side of a high mountain, both of which are seen over a very spacious forest. These form a delightful contrast to the fresh verdure, the water, the cattle, and other pastoral subjects immediately in sight. On the left is the pleasure garden, the shrubbery and the nursery. The scene is so capacious and presents itself in such a variety of forms, and with such a profusion of objects, which the alteration of the seasons, and other accidental causes are continually diversifying, that the eye is never tired. When the weather permits the doors are thrown open, when it is very fine we sit on the outside, and enjoy the sunshine or cool shade, as circumstances invite; in winter the room is sufficiently warm for the season, and we still enjoy the satisfaction of contemplating Nature, amidst hoar frosts, snows, clouds, storms, and all the magnificence of her distress. 
 I am certain you perceive the egotism that runs through my narrative, I perceive it myself, but if I did not indulge it in this instance, my feelings
 
would not accompany my description, and then it would be good for little. 
 
 
 MR. FORRESTER. 
 Your description is, exactly what I approve, without affectation of modesty; and, if I can judge, far from being exaggerated. I am become your neighbour. You, with peculiar ease and good humour, invite me to a social intimacy which is exceedingly desirable to me. I am a plain man, my knowledge is not so extensive, nor my habits of thinking so refined as yours. I have a daughter to whom I have given a certain portion of education. You are acquainted with the anxieties of a parent. I should be happy to send her to your school, I mean, I should be glad to have her admitted to your evening readings and conversations; but as I ask this with frankness, I wish so to be answered. You may perceive improprieties that I do not, or you may discover such hereafter. I have no doubt, but in that case, you will, or would, explain yourself, and being persuaded of this, I find no reluctance in making the request. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 You do me justice, Sir; I would. Bring the young lady, I have no doubt but the intercourse will be equally agreeable to all parties. 
 
 
 
 
 DIALOGUE II. 
 The scene is the library. The company consists of Mr. and Miss Forrester; Mr. and Mrs. Egerton; Mr. Eustace, the eldest; Mr. Charles, the second, and Mr. Harry, the youngest son; Nancy, the eldest; and Fanny, the youngest daughter. 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 THOUGH there are many vices, the operations and consequences of which are generally more violent and destructive than that of self-love, yet there are none that render the possessor more mean and despicable. The selfish and covetous man is avoided by all who are not interested in his affairs, and by them he is contemned. No rank or power can procure him respect. Bancroft, Archbishop of Canterbury, notwithstanding his dignity, had the following satirical epitaph bestowed upon him, for his covetousness:
 Here lies his Grace, in cold clay clad, 
 "Who died for want of what he had. 
Caligula was not more detested for his cruelties, than despised for his avarice; and when Cardinal Angelot received a severe chastisement from the
 
hand of his groom, who, not knowing his master in the dark, detected him stealing the oats from his own horses, his suffering became the subject of laughter instead of pity. 
 But here, children, I must observe to you, that parsimony and oeconomy are two very distinct things. Every man must have a certain degree of frugality, or he cannot continue benevolent. Lewis, the eleventh of France, was no miser, and yet in the chamber of accounts, 1461, there is two shillings charged for fustian to new sleeve his majesty's old doublet. 
 Nor would I have you understand, that I wish to see any of you luxurious. When the Thracians sent presents of meal, geese, honey-cakes, sweet-meats, wines, and other dainties to Agesilaus, the Lacedemonian, he only accepted of the meal; and when they pressed him to receive the others likewise, he took them, but immediately distributed them among the slaves, saying, that such delicacies were improper for men addicted to virtue, and that those things which tended to enfeeble the mind or the body, ought never to be admitted among a free and liberal people. 
 The social passions, my children, cannot be too intimately encouraged as long as they do not degenerate into prodigality. That universal benevolence, which inclines us to assist all those whom we have the power of assisting, without materially injuring ourselves, is perhaps the most resplendent
 
of virtues. Selfishness hides itself in a corner, and, like a cur with his paw upon a bone, snarles at whoever approaches: benevolence is frugal and sparing to herself, but opens her hand and her bosom to hunger, wretchedness and distress. 
 Do you, Charles, read the following tale, it will better illustrate my meaning than any thing which I can say. 
 
 
 
 
 SELFISHNESS, Or the Story of CARAZAN the Merchant of BAGDAT. 
 CARAZAN, the Merchant of Bagdat, was eminent throughout all the East for his avarice and his wealth: his origin was obscure as that of the spark which by the collision of steel and adamant is struck out of darkness; the patient labour of persevering diligence alone had made him rich. It was remembered, that when he was indigent he was thought to be generous; and he was still acknowledged to be inflexibly just. But whether in his dealings with men he discovered a perfidy which tempted him to put his trust in gold, or whether in proportion as he accumulated wealth he discovered his own importance by increase, Carazan prized it more as he used it less. He gradually lost the inclination to do good, as he acquired the power; and as the hand of time scattered
 
snow upon his head, the freezing influence extended to his bosom. 
 But though the door of Carazan was never opened by hospitality, nor his hand by compassion, yet fear led him constantly to the mosque at the stated hours of prayer: he performed all the rights of devotion with the most scrupulous punctuality, and had thrice paid his vows at the temple of the prophet. That devotion, which arises from the love of God, and necessarily includes the love of man, confers new dignity upon goodness, and is the object not only of affection but reverence. On the contrary, the devotion of the selfish, whether it be intended to avert the punishment which every one wishes to see inflicted, or to insure it by the complication of hypocrisy with guilt, never fails to excite indignation and abhorrence. Carazan, therefore, locking his door, and, turning round with a look of circumspective suspicion, proceeded to the mosque, and was followed by every eye with silent malignity. The poor suspended their supplications as he passed. Though he was known by every man, yet no man saluted him. 
 Such had long been the life of Carazan, and such was the character which he had acquired, when notice was given by proclamation, that he was removed to a magnificent building in the centre of the city; that his table should be spread for the hungry, and that the stranger should be welcome to his bed. The multitude soon rushed like a torrent
 
to his door, where they beheld him distributing bread to the hungry, and apparel to the naked; his eye softening with compassion, and his cheek glowing with delight. Every one gazed with astonishment at the prodigy; and the murmur of innumerable voices increasing like the sound of approaching thunder, Carazan beckoned with his hand. Attention suspended the tumult in a moment; and he thus gratified the curiosity which procured him audience. 
 "To Him who touches the mountains and they smoke, the almighty and most merciful, be everlasting honour! he hath ordained sleep to be the minister of instruction, for his visions have reproved me in the night. As I was sitting alone in my haram, with my lamp burning before me, computing the product of my merchandize, and exulting in the encrease of my wealth, I fell into a deep sleep, and the hand of him who dwells in the third heaven was upon me. I beheld the angel of death coming forward like a whirlwind, and he smote me before I could deprecate the blow. At the same moment I felt myself lifted from the ground and transported with astonishing rapidity through the regions of the air. The earth was contracted to an atom between; and the stars glowed round me with a lustre that obscured the sun. The gate of paradise was now in sight; and I was intercepted by a sudden brightness which no human eye could behold. The irrevocable sentence was now to be
 
pronounced; my day of probation was past, and from the evil of my life nothing could be taken away, nor could any thing be added to the good. When I reflected that my lot for eternity was cast, which not all the powers of nature could reverse, my confidence totally forsook me; and while I stood trembling and silent, covered with confusion and chilled with horror, I was thus addressed by the radiance that flamed before me." 
 'Carazan, thy worship has not been accepted, because it was not prompted by the love of God; neither can thy righteousness be rewarded, because it was not produced by the love of man: for thy own sake only, hast thou rendered to every man his due; and thou hast approached the Almighty only for thyself. Thou hast not looked upwards with gratitude nor round thee with kindness. Around thee thou hast indeed beheld vice and folly; but if vice and folly could justify thy parsimony, would they not condemn the bounty of heaven? If not upon the foolish and the vicious, where shall die sun diffuse his light, or the clouds distil their dew? Where shall the lips of the spring breathe fragrance, or the hand of autumn diffuse plenty? Remember, Cazaran, that thou hast shut compassion from thy heart, and grasped thy treasures with an hand of iron: thou hast lived for thyself; and, therefore, henceforth for ever thou shalt subsist alone. From the light of heaven, and from the society of all beings, shalt thou be driven; solitude
 
shall protract the lingering of etrnity, and darkness aggravate the horrors of despair.' 
 "At this moment I was driven by some secret and irresistible power, through the glowing system of creation, and passed innumerable worlds in an instant. As I approached the verge of nature, I perceived the shadows of total and boundless vacuity deepen before me, a dreadful region of eternal silence, solitude, and darkness! unutterable horror seized me at the prospect, and this exclamation burst from me with all the vehemence of desire. O! that I had been doomed for ever to the common receptacle of impenitence and guilt! there society would have alleviated the torment of despair, and the rage of fire could not have excluded the comfort of light. Or, if I had been condemned to reside on a comet, that would return but once in a thousand years to the regions of light and life; the hope of these periods, however distant, would chear me in the dreary interval of cold and darkness, and the vicissitude would divide eternity into time. While this thought passed over my mind, I lost sight of the remotest star, and the last glimmering of light was quenched into utter darkness. The agonies of despair encreased every moment, as every moment augmented my distance from the last habitable world. I reflected with intolerable anguish, that when ten thousand thousand years should carry me beyond the reach of all but that
 
power who fills infinitude, I should still look forward into an immense abyss of darkness, through which I should still drive without succour and without society, farther and farther for ever and ever. I then stretched out my hands towards the regions of existence, with an emotion that awaked me. Thus have I been taught to estimate society, like every other blessing, by its loss. My heart is warmed to liberality; and I am zealous to communicate the happiness which I feel, to those from whom it is derived; for, the society of one wretch, whom in the pride of prosperity I would have spurned from my door, would, in the dreadful solitude to which I was condemned, have been more highly prized, than the gold of Afric, or the gems of Golconda." 
 At this reflection upon his dream, Carazan became suddenly silent, and looked upwards in an extasy of gratitude and devotion. The multitude was struck at once with the precept and the example; and the Caliph, to whom the event was related, that he might be liberal beyond the power of gold, commanded it to be recorded for the benefit of posterity. 
 
 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 I perceive by your countenances, children, there is not one of you who would not dread the punishment of Carazan. 
 
 
 
 NANCY. 
 I am sure, Sir, I should; and I am quite happy to think it was only a dream, 
 
 
 EUSTACE. 
 Pray, Sir, did you ever read the life of Barnard Gilpin? 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Yes. 
 
 
 EUSTACE. 
 And don't you think he was a very hospitable, good man? 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 I do indeed; one of the best of men. 
 
 
 EUSTACE. 
 Then if you please, Sir, I'll read you a little Extract I made from his life; I dare say it will be acceptable to Miss Forrester and the rest of the company; and it will form an agreeable contrast to the selfishness so well described in the tale of Carazan. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Do so, Eustace. 
 
 
 EUSTACE. 
 Barnard Gilpin was rector of Houghton le Spring, in the reigns of the Queens Mary and Elizabeth. At his first undertaking the care of a parish, he laid
 
it down as a maxim, to do all the good in his power, and to gain the affections of his parishioners. To succeed in this, he used no servile compliances; but his behaviour was free without levity, obliging without meanness, and insinuating without art. He condescended to the weak, bore with the passionate, complied with the scrupulous, and in a truly apostolic manner became all things to all men. 
 To his humanity and courtesy, he added an unwearied application to the instruction of those under his care; and with unceasing assiduity he employed himself in admonishing the vicious and encouraging the well-intentioned, so that in a few years he made a greater change in his neigbourhood, than could have been imagined. 
 His hospitable manner of living, was the admiration of the whole country. He spent in his family, every fortnight, forty bushels of corn, twenty bushels of malt, and a whole ox, besides a proportionate quantity of other provisions. Strangers and travellers found a chearful reception; all were welcome that came, and even their beasts had such care taken of them, that it was humourously said, "If a horse was turned loose in any part of the county it would immediately make its way to the rector of Houghton." 
 Every Sunday, from Michaelmas till Easter, was a sort of public day with him. During this season he expected to see all his parishioners and their families. For their reception he had three tables well covered: the first was for gentlemen, the second
 
for husbandmen and farmers, and the third for day labourers. This piece of hospitality he never omitted, even when losses, or a scarcity of provision made its continuance rather difficult. When he was absent from home, no alteration was made in his family expences. The poor were fed as usual, and his neighbours entertained. 
 Lord Burleigh, the Lord Treasurer, being sent by Queen Elizabeth to transact some affairs in Scotland, when he came into Gilpin's neighbourhood, struck with the universal praises which filled every mouth, he could not resist his inclination to see a man so truly respectable; and although his lordship came on him unawares, yet he received his noble guest with such true politeness, and treated him and his retinue in so affluent and generous a manner, that the treasurer would often afterwards say, he could hardly have expected more at Lambeth. At his departure, embracing his generous host, he told him he had heard great things in his commendation, but he had seen what far exceeded all he had heard: and when he had got to the top of a hill, which is about a mile from Houghton, he turned his horse to take one more view of the place, and broke out into this exclamation, "There is enjoyment of life indeed! who can blame that man for not accepting a bishoprick? What doth he want to make him greater or happier or more useful to mankind." 
 As Mr. Gilpin's whole life was a series of pious, generous and charitable acts, there is no doing him
 
justice in this extract. Mr. Gilpin was not a dignitary of the church, nor did he possess a plurality of benefices, but he exercised a noble hospitality, and a seemingly boundless charity and liberality, with a living of four hundred pounds a year, which he refused to exchange for the bishoprick of Carlisle, and many rich benefices that were offered him at different times. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 I don't know, Eustace, how to express the pleasure you have given me as a father, in the proof, I have just now received, of your disposition to admire a truly great and most respectable character. Yes, my children, they are such men as Mr. Gilpin, whom I would recommend you to imitate. Happy in themselves, and beneficent to others, the reproach of the vicious, and the glory of human nature, they not only have contributed to the universal good of Society, while living, but will continue to do so, as long as goodness and good men shall be remembered upon earth; for, those who can read the life of Barnard Gilpin, without wishing to be like him, must be lost to virtue indeed! 
 
 
 MRS. EGERTON. 
 I think, my dear boy, you are entitled to the thanks of the company, for introducing so virtuous and valuable an example to their notice. 
 
 
 
 MR. FORRESTER. 
 I think so too, Madam: I, at least, acknowledge myself very much obliged to him; and shall take care to make myself a little more intimate with this worthy Rector. 
 
 
 
 DIALOGUE III. 
 
 NANCY. 
 THE account which my brother was so obliging as to give us, yesterday, of the rector of Houghton, reminded me, at the time, of a story I had lately read; in which I very much admired the benevolent disposition of a lady, who, though she certainly had great reason to resent the conduct of her husband towards her, had the virtue and fortitude to forget her wrongs, and act in the most generous and amiable manner. I have shewed it my mamma, and she approved of my offering it to you, Sir, and the present company, for their entertainment, if you and they think proper. 
 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 I can have no doubt of the propriety of it, my dear, if your mamma has seen it, and it has had her approbation; neither could I if she had not seen it, as I think, my dear, your own good sense, would have prevented you from offering us an improper subject. But pray is it a novel, or the history of some known and authentic character? 
 
 
 NANCY. 
 It is given under feigned names, and therefore has all the air of a novel; but the incidents are so natural, that I cannot help believing them to be true, at least some of them are so noble, that I cannot help wishing them to be so. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Well, read, child, and let us hear. 
 
 
 
 
 BENEVOLENCE. Or the Story of PALAMON and AMASINA. 
 PALAMON and AMASINA were married almost too young to know the duties of the state they entered into, yet both being extremely good-natured, a mutual desire of obliging each other appeared in all their words and actions; and, though this complaisance was not owing to those tender emotions which attract the heart with a resistless
 
force, and bear the name of love, yet were the effects so much the same, as not to be distinguished. 
 The first year of their marriage made them the happy parents of an heir to a plentiful estate. All their friends congratulated this addition to their felicity; and the most perfect joy and tranquillity reigned. 
 Amasina, after she became a mother, began to feel, by degrees, an encreasing warmth of affection for him that made her so; and having no reason to doubt an equal regard from him, thought herself as happy as a woman could be, and that there were joys in marriage greater than she had formerly supposed. 
 Quite otherwise was it with Palamon: the time was now arrived, which taught him what indeed it was to love. The hopes, the fears, the anxieties, the impatiences, all the unnumbered cares, which are attributed to that passion, now took possession of his heart. He pined, he languished but, alas! not for his wife. He had, unhappily, seen a young lady at the opera, who had given his heart sensations and desires unfelt, unknown before. As he happened to fit in the same box with her, he had frequently an opportunity of speaking to her: and, though only on ordinary subjects, every answer she made to what he said, seemed, to him, to discover a profusion of wit and gave him the most longing desire to be acquainted with her. 
 Fortune, favourable to his wishes, presented her to him the next day, in one of the public walks, accompanied by a lady and a gentleman, the latter of whom he had a slight knowledge of. He joined them; and perceiving it was to the other lady that the gentleman seemed most attached, he was at the greater liberty to say a thousand tender and gallant things to her, who was now become the object of his wishes. 
 Belinda, who was in all respects one of the modern modish ladies, received the compliments he made her in a manner which convinced him his conversation was not disagreeable to her; and, some mention happening to be made of a masquerade that night, she told him, that both she and her fair companion intended to be there, and were then going to bespeak habits for that purpose. 
 The hint was not lost upon Palamon: he followed them at a distance; and when the ladies had left the shop he went in under pretence of hiring a domino for himself. Finding the woman behind the counter was no stranger to the ladies, he easily prevailed on her to let him know, not only what dresses they had bespoke, but also of what condition and character they were. She informed him, that Belinda had a large fortune, and, her parents being dead, was under the care of guardians, though she did not live with them, but had lodgings in an adjacent street. 
 Palamon was transported at this intelligence, as it seemed to promise him an easy access to her acquaintance, and the privilege of visiting her; which, probably, in those early days of his passion was all he aimed at. His impatience, however, occasioned him to go betimes to the masquerade, that he might have an opportunity of examining every one that came in. He soon discovered Belinda, and was not long in convincing her, that he was the gentleman who made her so many compliments in the morning. This greatly flattered her vanity. She listened attentively to the assurances he gave her of his passion, and frequently let fall some words, as if they escaped her inadvertently, that might make him think she would not be ungrateful, if he persisted in giving testimonies of a constant flame. 
 Palamon was transported to find the offer of his heart so well received; and made so good a use of the opportunity she gave him of entertaining her, that he obtained her permission to attend her home; and, as it was then too late for them to continue their conversation, to visit her the next day in the afternoon. 
 Belinda, it is probable, had no other motive for entertaining Palamon, and receiving his addresses, than merely that of hearing herself praised, and giving pain, as she imagined, to others of her admirers who were less frequently admitted. But, how dangerous it is to encourage an intimacy with
 
one of the other sex, too many, possessed of a greater share of discretion than Belinda, have experienced. This unwary lady in meditating new arts to captivate her lover, became insnared herself. In short, Palamon succeeded. 
 Amasina, all this while, lost ground in his affection; she every day seemed less fair, and whatever she said, or did, had in it a kind of aukwardness which, before, he was far from discovering; every thing was now displeasing in her; if endearing, her fondness was childish and silly; and if more reserved, she was sullen and ill-natured. One moment he was out of humour if she spoke, and the next offended at her silence. He was continually seeking some pretence to find fault with the most justifiable conduct; and even vexed when he had nothing in reality to condemn. Unhappy, but certain consequences of a new attachment! which, not content with the injury it does, adds to it ill humour, and a wish for some occasion to hate the object we no longer love. 
 The poor lady could not help observing this alteration in his behaviour; but, as she was far from guessing the real motive, imputed it to some unlucky turn in his affairs; though of what nature she could not imagine, they having had a large fortune settled on them at their marriage, besides the reversion of what his father should die possessed. 
 For more than a whole year did she combat his ill-humour with sweetness, gentleness, and the most
 
obliging behaviour: and, though she began to think herself lost to his affection, bore even that afflicting thought with the most submissive patience; still flattering herself, that, if it were even so, he would one day reflect, that she did not deserve her ill fortune. 
 Jealousy was, however, a passion she was wholly unacquainted with: many beautiful women visited at her house, and she had never seen the least propensity in him to gallantry with any of them; so that she rather imagined a disgust to the whole sex was growing on him, than an attachment to any one in particular. 
 Thus did her innocence and unsuspecting nature deceive her, till one day a female friend, more busy than wise, opened her eyes to the true reason of her husband's coldness. This lady, by means of a maid servant she had lately entertained, who had lived with Belinda long enough to know the whole secret of her amour with Palamon, was made acquainted with all that passed between that guilty pair. She learned from this unfaithful creature, that Belinda had been made a mother by Palamon; and that the child was disposed of to a person who for a present of fifty guineas, had taken the sole charge of it, so that it should never appear to the disgrace of the unnatural parents. Not the most minute circumstance, relating to the affair, but was betrayed by this wretch, partly in revenge for her having been discarded, and partly to gain the
 
favour of her present lady, who, she easily perceived, loved to hear news of this kind. 
 Amasina would fain have treated this account as fabulous, and have persuaded her friend to regard it only as a piece of malice in the reporter; but the other was positive in her assertion, and told her, that it was utterly impossible for such a person to dress up a fiction with so many particulars, and such a shew of truth. "Besides, added she, if there were nothing in it, we might easily disprove all she has said, by going to the woman who has the care of the child, and whose name and place of abode she has told me." 
 Compelled at last to believe, she gave for a while a loose to her tears and complainings, but her good sense as well as good temper, soon got the better of her passion; and, when her friend asked her, in what manner she would proceed, in order to do herself justice What can I do? replied this charming wife, but endeavour to render myself more obliging, more pleasant, and more engaging, if possible, than my rival; and make Palamon see, he can find nothing in Belinda, that is wanting in me? 
 "O Heaven! cried the lady, can you forgive such an injury?" "Yes, resumed Amasina, stifling her sighs as much as she was able, love is an involuntary passion." "And will you not upbraid him with his ingratitude, and expose Belinda?" said she. "Neither the one nor the other, answered Amasina coldly; either of these methods would indeed
 
render me unworthy of a return of his affection; and I conjure and beseech you, added she, by all the friendship I flatter myself you have for me, that you will not make the least mention of this affair to any one in the world." 
 Amasina was no sooner left alone, and at liberty to meditate more deeply on the shocking intelligence she had received, than she again began to fancy there was a possibility of its being false: the suspense, however, seemed more dreadful to her than the confirmation could be, and she resolved to be fully convinced of the truth, if there were any means of being so. 
 The unhappy wife of Palamon, who soon became assured of his persidy, determined to bear it with as much patience as she was able; which was indeed sufficient to render her behaviour such, as made him positive in his own mind, that she had not the least suspicion of the wrong he did her; and also compelled him very often to accuse himself for being guilty of what he could not answer to his reason, though he had not resolution enough to abandon Belinda, notwithstanding that the levity of her conduct discovered the difference between a mistress and a wife. 
 Whenever Amasina reflected on this change in her husband, as she had little else in her mind, there was no part in the adventure appeared more strange to her, than that a lady, born and educated in the manner she knew Belinda was, and who had
 
so far yielded to temptation as to throw off all modesty and honour, should have so little regard for her innocent child, as to abandon it to miseries she knew not of what kind. This was a barbarity, she thought exceeded the crime to which it owed its birth, and she more readily forgave the injury done to herself, than that to the helpless infant. 
 The more she reflected, the more she was astonished, that a woman should act so contrary to nature; and, by often picturing to herself the woes to which this deserted child might probably be exposed, became at length so generously interested in its fate, as to form a resolution of which few, beside herself, would have been capable. 
 She had been informed, by her officious friend, both of the name and habitation of the woman with whom this little creature had been left; when, without making any person privy to her design, muffled herself up in her capuchin, and went in a hackney-chair to the house. The woman received her with a great deal of respect and kindness, imagining she was come on the same business as Belinda. 
 The virtuous Amasina blushed at being suspected by this woman to be guilty of an act her soul shuddered at. "I come not, said the wife of Palamon, on the business you seem to think, though on one which equally requires your secrecy. I have no unhappy infant to leave with you, but am come to ease you of one you have lately taken charge of. 
 The woman looked much surprized to hear her speak in this manner, and knew not well what answer to make; but Amasina put an end to her suspense, by telling her, that she was in the secret of the lady, who left a child at her house at a certain time and who had given fifty guineas to be eased for ever of the trouble of it. "I am, said Amasina, a near relation of the gentleman to whom the poor infant owes its being, and cannot consent, that any thing which does so, should be deserted and exposed. I therefore desire, that if alive, you will let me see it. I will provide for it better than it can be possible that you should do for the pittance left by the mother." 
 The woman affected to expatiate on the impossibility of her taking the care she could wish to do, with children left on these terms; but that heaven knew she did all she could, and often laid put more than she received. She assured her, that the child she enquired after was alive and a fine boy, but that he was with a person who indeed nursed for the parish, who yet was a very good woman, and did her duty. 
 That may be, replied Amasina, but I must have him removed; and, if you can provide another nurse who can be depended on, I have a power from the father to satisfy you for your trouble, in a very ample manner. In the mean time, continued she, putting five guineas into her hand, take this as an earnest, and let the child be brought here to-morrow
 
about this time, and a new nurse, whom you can recommend. 
 The next day, this excellent pattern of conjugal love took with her every thing proper for a child, whom she was determined to make her own by adoption. She no sooner saw the infant in his new nurse's arms, than she killed him with a tenderness little less than maternal; then, after having agreed upon terms, ordered him to be dressed, in her presence, in the cloaths she had brought; and, every thing being settled, returned home with a contentment of mind which words are too poor to express. 
 Nor was this a sudden start of goodness and generosity; for the more she reflected on what she had done, the greater was the pleasure she received. She never let a week pass without going to see her charge; and had he been in reality her own, her diligence could not have been greater. 
 By accustoming herself to perform the duties of a mother to the child of Belinda, she began really to love him as such; and what, at first, was only pity, converted by degrees into a tender affection. When Palamon was abroad, she would often order him to be brought to her, and, sending for her own son at the same time, divert herself with their smiles and antics. She was one day employed in this manner, when Palamon unexpectedly returned, and came directly into the room where they were. Whatever indifference he had for his wife, he had always shewn the greatest tenderness to her son; and
 
he now took him up in his arms and kissed him, as was his custom to do. "Here is another little one, said Amasina, smiling, who also claims some portion of your kindness;" and at the same time presented Belinda's child to him. "By what right, madam? replied Palamon in the same gay tone. "As he is mine," resumed his wife. "Yours!" cried he. "Yes, answered she, he is mine by adoption; and I must have you look upon him as yours likewise." "My complaisance for you may carry me great lengths, said he; but as I know you do nothing without being able to give a reason, I should be glad to learn the motive of so extraordinary a request." 
 "The infant you see, said she, in a more serious tone than before, and whom I have, in reality, taken under my care, owes its being to two persons of condition; but, being illegitimate, the care of reputation prevailed over nature; and this innocent victim of an inconsiderate passion I found abandoned, either to perish, or, surviving, to survive but to miseries worse than death. The thought was shocking to me, and I resolved to snatch him from the threatening woes, and provide for him out of my private purse, in such a manner as not to make life hateful to him." 
 "An action truly charitable," said Palamon, a little perplexed; "but this is not the reason I expected, since by the same rule your pity might be extended to hundreds, whom, doubtless, you may
 
find exposed in the like manner. It must, therefore, be some plea more forcible than mere compassion that attaches you particularly to this child." 
 Amasina, who had foreseen what answer her husband would make, was debating within herself, whether it would be best for her to evade, or to confess the truth of this affair; and, not being able to determine, appeared no less confused and disordered than she would have been, if about to make an acknowledgement for some great offence. At last, "a plea there is, indeed, said she, but ;" here her voice and courage failed her, and she was utterly incapable to give him the satisfaction he required. 
 Palamon was confounded beyond measure. Not knowing what to think of a behaviour so new, and which seemed to denote that she laboured with a secret of some importance, he looked stedfastly on her for several minutes; and perceiving that she changed colour, and had her eyes fixed on the earth, grew quite impatient, and cried out, "What plea? what mystery?" 
 "A mystery, replied she, which I had much rather you should guess at than oblige me to unravel. Oh Palamon! continued she, after a pause, is there no instinct in nature that can inform you, my affection for the father makes his offspring, of whomsoever born, dear to me? I cannot hate Belinda so much as I love Palamon; and, while I
 
am performing the offices of a mother to this child, I forget the share she has in him to remember what I owe to him as yours." 
 The reader's imagination must here supply the place of description. Impossible it is for words to give a just idea of what a husband, circumstanced like Palamon, must feel. To have his faults thus palpably made known to her, whom he most desired should be ignorant of them to receive the highest obligations where he could have expected only resentment; and to hear the detection of what he had done discovered to him by the injured person, in such a manner as if herself, not he, had been the criminal! his hurried thoughts, between remorse, astonishment, and shame, left him not the power to reply. He walked about the room in a disordered motion, to vain endeavouring to recover presence of mind, a thing so necessary on this occasion. At last, throwing himself into an easy chair, just opposite to that in which his wife was sitting, "Good God! cried he, am I awake! Can it be possible there should be such a woman in the world!" 
 Amasina could not see him in these agitations without a concern, which made her almost repent having occasioned them. She ran to him, and, throwing her arms about his neck, "My dear, dear Palamon, said she, let it not trouble you that I am in possession of a secret which I neither sought after, nor ever divulged. Consider me as I am, your wife, and be assured you can be
 
guilty of no errors, which I shall not carefully conceal. Judge of my sincerity, continued she, by my behaviour, which, you are sensible, has not in the least been changed by my knowledge of this affair." 
 "O Amasina! cried he, pressing her tenderly to his bosom, I am indeed sensible how little I have deserved such proofs of your amazing goodness; my soul overflows with gratitude and love; yet how can I atone for my past crimes?" "Mention them no more, interrupted she, only let me share in that heart, which my want of charms denies me the hope of wholly possessing." 
 He answered only in broken sentences, but such as testified what she wished to find in him more than the most eloquent speeches could have done. Convinced that the victory gained over him was perfect and sincere, she would have known a transport without alloy, but for the tender pain it gave her to find so much difficulty in persuading him to forgive himself. 
 Desirous that she should have nothing, for the future, to apprehend from Belinda, he immediately wrote a letter to that lady; wherein he acquainted her, that, sensible of the injury he had done the best of wives, he was determined to pursue no pleasures for the future in which she did not participate. He represented to her the shame and folly of such an intrigue in the most pathetic terms, advised her to think of living so as to regain that reputation which, he was obliged to confess he had contributed
 
to make her lose; assured her that the resolution he had made to see her no more, was not to be shaken by arguments, and begged she would endeavour to follow his example, and forget all that had passed between them. 
 Though he desired no answer, he received one, filled with the most virulent reproaches on himself, and mingled with many contempuous reflections on his wife. The first he was unmoved at; but the other totally destroyed all the remains of regard and consideration he had for her. He tore the letter into a thousand pieces, and, to shew this injurious woman the contempt and resentment with which he had treated what she said, gathered up the scattered fragments, and sent them back to her under a sealed cover, but without writing a word. 
 Thus ended Palamon's amour with Belinda, and thus Amasina received the happy reward of her generous and exalted conduct, by ever after possessing undivided the grateful heart of her beloved husband. 
 
 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Thank you, my dear Nancy. Your Amasina is indeed a Heroine of the first order, and I will venture to assert that if you become such a wife, you will be certain of having a tender and respectful husband; beside which, you will acquire the love and admiration of every good person; which in my opinion are the greatest riches the world
 
can bestow. I dare say You, Miss Forrester, think this lady acted very nobly. 
 
 
 MISS FORRESTER. 
 Yes, Sir; I do indeed. But, to confess the truth, I am almost afraid, if I had the same trial, I should not possess the same prudence. 
 
 
 MR. FORRESTER. 
 Prudence! my dear call it by some more elevated title. Her's was a virtue much more sublime than prudence. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 I have no doubt, but that both our daughters will endeavour to act, from motives as generous and superior as were those of Amasina. We have numerous examples upon record, of ladies, who have equalled the greatest actions of the greatest men, whose names are the ornament of history, the honour of their sex, and the delight of society. Who can read the account of the siege of Wensberg, in Germany, without feeling his heart expand towards the lovely fair? When the city could no longer resist the arms of the emperor Conrad, and when circumstances made it probable that little quarter would be shewn to the men, the women petitioned leave of the emperor to depart from the city and each to take with her what she could carry. Imagine, my children, what was the surprize of the emperor and his army, to see them come forth, not bending beneath a load of gold and
 
silver, but each with her husband upon her back. The emperor and all his soldiers, at least all that had hearts, wept at the sight; the women were adored, and the city was pardoned. Bodinus affirms, that Laurentius Medices was so affected, only by reading this story, that he was restored to health, which he had long in vain expected from his physicians. 
 But superior in magnanimity, and equal in affection, even to this, was the behaviour of Arria, the beloved wife of Paetus. This unfortunate man had joined in rebellion with Camillus, against that weak and wicked emperor Claudius Caesar, and his attempts miscarrying he was taken and sent to Rome. The affectionate Arria, who resolutely followed her husband through all his fortunes, when she was not permitted to attend him in the same ship, hired a fisherman's bark, and exposed herself to the dangers of seas and the severities of the weather, in this frail vessel, rather than forsake her Paetus. When they arrived at Rome, he was condemned to die by his own hand, and permitted to chuse what death he liked best. It was now that the fortitude, as well as affection of the lovely Arria were discovered. Paetus was timid and dreaded death: Arria was afraid, lest his timidity should prompt him to something unworthy of himself. She made him sensible that the eyes of present and future generations were upon him, she described his duty, she awakened his courage, and after embracing him, in a manner which love like her's
 
could alone inspire, she took the poniard, and with a smile of pity and of love, bidding him farewel, pierced her lovely bosom then, while she had still the power to speak, exclaimed, "O my Paetus, this wound is a pleasant one, it is that only which thou art going to give that is painful to me!" 
 
 
 
 DIALOGUE IV. 
 
 MRS. EGERTON. 
 YOUR father, my dear girls, very kindly took occasion yesterday to make an eulogium on women, by introducing examples of some of our most illustrious ornaments. I am far from wishing to lessen you in your own esteem, I know that to have a proper idea of your own character and consequence in society, is one great inducement to act up to that idea. But this has its dangers; it may make us confident, proud and assuming: it may destroy that distrust which gives caution, or may inspire that arrogance which must disgust. It is my duty to remind you that, as there have been women dignified by their virtues, so have
 
there been others abhorred for their vices. This is a painful recollection, my children, but a necessary one. While our hearts are animated to connubial love, by the example of an Eleanor, who delighted to imbibe the poison that otherwise must have killed her husband, let us mournfully remember there were such women as Tullia and Messalina; lest a too great portion of vanity should destroy that emulation, which the example of the virtuous would otherwise incite. 
 The story which I shall recommend to your attention, this afternoon, contains an unhappy instance of the power of vanity. It is told by the suffering person, and with a sufficient degree of force to convince us she had long felt it's effects and repented of her folly. I will read it to you myself, because I would have you who are interterested in it, be particularly attentive. 
 
 
 
 
 COQUETRY, Or the Story of LADY WILDHAM. 
 BEWARE OF COQUETRY, said the old lady of Wildham Hall, to her young niece; it is not only the most ungenerous, but the most dangerous folly, or rather vice, to which any woman can be addicted; it is destructive of its own purposes, and there is no surer way to make any man hate,
 
or at least despise you, than first to encourage his addresses, and afterwards treat them with neglect or contempt: it is an injury, which of all others, man finds the greatest difficulty in forgiving; conquer therefore your thirst of praise, and while you are affable, take care not to seem particular. It was the want of this prudence that has rendered above half my life, one continued round of disquietude, that has made me an accessary in deeds of blood, and that gave to me, instead of the youth whom I had an affection for, one who was the scourge of my insincerity and duplicity. I would desire you to relate your history (said the young lady) but that I fear, as you say it was unfortunate, the recollection may give you pain. Your desire shall be gratified, (replied her aunt) in hopes that you may profit by my misconduct, and subsequent misfortunes. 
 You know, my dear, I was the only daughter of Sir Herbert Winworth, and I believe you have heard me say I received my education chiefly in the country, at Derby, the family seat being in the vicinity of that town. It is necessary to inform you, that my person and accomplishments made me the toast and admiration of all the country gentlemen, especially the youthful and unmarried ones. I conversed in Italian and French with ease and volubility, had a fine voice, and took great delight in my harpsichord. My understanding I believe was not contemptible, and I thought it prodigious.
 
With all these advantages, my vanity was boundless, my imagination romantic, and I was sometimes almost fit to believe no man could be worthy of me, who had not killed a fiery dragon, and pulled the sultan by the beard. You smile, my dear, but though my ideas might not be exactly these, they were very extravagant: no flattery could be too violent for me, and however I might pretend to disbelieve, or to be displeased at hyperbolical praise and adulation, yet those who had art enough to administer such potions, had penetration enough to perceive how delicious they were to my palate. Of all my admirers none had hitherto made so great a progress as Glanmore. Others praised my beauty, which was so universally spoken of that I never imagined it wanted any confirmation; but he told me my personal charms, like the glorious light of the meridian sun, were seen even by idiots, when they presumed to gaze, and which they could not do without feeling their immediate power; but as philosophy alone had discovered the salubrious and hidden effects of that blessed luminary, so the charms of my wit, the elegance and propriety of my remarks, the keenness of my satire, the sweet flow of my language, and the conviction that attended all my arguments and discourses were beauties which he believed very few indeed were capable of properly attending to, and which he, however great his admiration might be, confessed himself an imperfect judge of. This gross
 
flattery pleased me the more, because young Glanmore was continually spoken of as the best scholar, and most sensible youth in the country. 
 My father, whose tenderness and love for me were equally visible, and who, I believe, rated my accomplishments as highly as any one, myself excepted, notwithstanding his partiality, could not help observing the violence of my ruling passion. He beheld with anxiety the pleasure I took in the society of the most contemptible fops, and the freedoms I allowed them. He saw with pain the chagrin my temper was liable to if any man took the liberty of behaving with ease, and paying a proper regard to any other woman. He could not stop his ears against the continual egotism of my discourse; and if praise was presumed to be given to another object, he could not but observe how ready I was to introduce myself, and make a comparison either to my own advantage, or by tenaciously dispraising my abilities, when they had evidently the superiority, to force others into a vindication of them, and violently to extort flattery. No one is ever so severely satirical upon persons of this character, as they are upon themselves, their inordinate thirst of adulation betrays them into a thousand fooleries, and places them perpetually in numerous ridiculous situations, under which they shrink, and blush, for a moment, and generally, in order to extricate themselves, commit some temporary blunder that heightens the ridicule. Be careful, therefore
 
my dear, never to introduce yourself into the discourse, either by comparison, or insinuation, and whenever you observe such a propensity, check yourself very severely, as knowing yourself guilty of a mental weakness, very unworthy of that fortitude of mind, which it is the greatest happiness to possess. 
 My father's admonitions, though given with the utmost gentleness, were exceedingly irksome to me; I was unwilling to believe I had any one foible, and that person who spoke disrespectfully of coquettes was sure to incur my displeasure; nay, when I sometimes had the courage to reason with myself concerning it, I could never be thoroughly persuaded that I had one atom of the character in my composition. The picture still was perfect, and all those tints which a severe connoisseur might possibly think too glaring, with me gently glided off into shades of innocent gaiety, harmless raillery, generous emulation, and merited praise. 
 Glanmore, who not only from motives of love and interest, but likewise from pride, pursued the little advantages he had hitherto gained, became very assiduous in his endeavours to obtain me. There was a certain triumph, which would have gratified his vanity, even superior to every other consideration, which was that of winning the consent of one who had rejected so many, and whom so many were daily wishing to possess. The torrent of adulation, which had been daily augmented from so many pretty streams, had rendered me insensible
 
as yet of any sincere and tender attachment: my father from motives which you will easily guess, was importunate with me to marry, and Glanmore teazed me exceedingly to give him permission to obtain my father's consent for our nuptials. I knew Sir Herbert wished me to marry Lord Strangely, eldest son of the earl of Wildham, who had long paid his addresses to me, encouraged by the countenance my father gave him, although I had constantly ridiculed his passion, and contemned his love. Unfortunate for me that I did so: I have since suffered severely for my injustice. I call it injustice, because I think it not only weak, but ungenerous to treat any one with scorn because they love. Our humanity should instruct us not to add the sting of contempt to the thorn of despair. 
 Although I felt no violence of affection for Glanmore, yet there was something exceedingly pleasing in his flattery and assiduity, and as his company was more agreeable to me than any other man's, I imagined that it must proceed from love, at least I endeavoured to persuade myself so, for I was very unwilling to suppose myself incapable of that passion, which at some intervals I almost began to suspect: partly therefore from an imaginary affection, and partly from a supposition that Sir Herbert would not give his consent, and that consequently my promise would be no bar to my inclinations, if they should happen to vary, I gave
 
Glanmore an assurance, if he could bring my father to approve of our union, my will should not prove an interruption to his happiness. He left me when I delivered this decree in his favour, with the most ardent protestations of his love, and rapturous praises of my condescension and goodness, and flew to find Sir Herbert, promising to leave nothing unattempted, that might prevail on him to comply with his desires. 
 My lover's eloquence, contrary to my expectation, soon prevailed with my father. Glanmore told him that though it was true, his estate was not so extensive, nor his rank in life so elevated as that of some others, who solicited the honour of becoming his son-in-law, yet he hoped his endeavours, when united with Sir Herbert's interest, might enable him to deserve and procure a title, which, thus attained, he represented as being equally honourable to being born to one. Sir Herbert's anxiety for me, joined to a desire of having me perfectly satisfied with the man whom I should take for a husband, together with Glanmore's abilities, made him eager for the consummation of the nuptials, and by the consent of all parties, they were accordingly appointed to be celebrated in a month, as I could not, without appearing childish and irresolute, obtain a longer period. I was now introduced to all Glanmore's friends, who paid him the highest compliments upon his choice, and I began to consider myself, not without frequent intervals of
 
doubt and fear, in some degree, his wife; while the increasing tenderness of his manner plainly proved how happy the thoughts of this alliance had made Him. 
 One afternoon, when Glanmore came to pay me his usual visit, he brought a stranger from London, a friend of his who had come down to spend a fortnight with him, and introduced him to our family. Here, my dear Caroline, said he, when he presented him to me, be pleased for my sake to know Sir Harry Moreton, a distant relation of mine. He is an infidel to the Cyprian goddess, continued he, laughing, and his amorous creed runs thus: "I believe not in the power of Cupid, and I despise his darts, &c." I turn him over into your hands, to punish him as you think proper, you will soon make a convert of him. Nay, answered I, if those are your friend's tenets I despair: unbelievers in these days are as resolute in the defence of their heresies, notwithstanding the badness of their cause, as the faithful themselves, who have the light of revelation to guide them. 
 Madam, replied the stranger, although I never was, nor perhaps ever shall be so romantic as my friend Glanmore pretends to be, yet I can admire wit and beauty, without superstitiously adoring them, though I assure you I have seldom met so fine a subject for admiration as I behold at this instant. 
 I curtsied, and Glanmore exclaimed, "Your humble servant, Mr. Admirer." When Glanmore and his friend were gone, I began to ruminate upon the behaviour of the latter: my pride was bleeding; I could not bear the reflection of Sir Harry's insolent freedom, as I thought it. Neither could I help observing, that his admiration turned chiefly upon himself, and that he was the hero of every topic of conversation, wherein he bore a part. I perceived the absurdity of such behaviour, and could not avoid applying it to my own conduct; I called him a coxcomb, and recollection of past incidents, joined to my present wounded vanity, told me in a tone, something louder than a whisper, that I was little better than a coquette. I found an uneasiness attending the rememberance of him and his indifference, and began to suspect he was to revenge upon me some part of the chagrin that I had inflicted upon others. 
 He came the next day with Glanmore, and notwithstanding I took every opportunity of extorting compliments from him, and used every art I was mistress of to heighten my charms, and awaken his attention, I found it impossible to fix it even for a moment upon any object but himself. 
 By repeated attacks, I found the only battery which could possibly be played, with any prospect of success, was flattery; I was weak enough to forget my former pride, and present engagements, and desperate enough to resolve if possible, let what would
 
be the consequence, to make Sir Harry acknowledge my power, and bow to my charms. I soothed my imagination with the thought of how I would use him when once I had him in proper subjection. 
 It is in vain, my dear, to endeavour to describe the meannesses to which pride made me submit, nor can I tell you by what unaccountable means my mind became so infatuated, and my affections enslaved so entirely to an object, too, so little worthy of them: yet, thus it was; and though it was impossible to accuse him of either beauty, wit, or one exalted qualification of body or mind, I was unhappy when out of his sight, and the thoughts of my approaching nuptials filled me with the most gloomy horror. 
 How can we account for these things? Why is it that we sigh and wish so earnestly for an object, not because if is worthy of such affection, but because we cannot obtain it? And why when by fortune or industry we have gained what we desire does it immediately become indifferent to us? My only reason for loving Sir Harry was, because it seemed almost impossible for me to have him. I believe this is an error to which the human mind, however capacious, is ever in some degree subject, and though, as it is therefore indubitably a wholesome law of nature, which prompts us to activity, yet we should be careful not to increase it in young or weak
 
minds, by continually gratifying their desires, and flattering their persons, or actions; unless with great caution, and to excite emulation. 
 However conceited Sir Harry might be of his accomplishments, he was not so blind to his interest as to be indifferent about his fortune; my weak behaviour, and his own confidence of personal merit, sufficiently persuaded him of the practibility of rivaling his friend, and as this was a point which did not in the least deter him, it was not long before he answered my advances more warmly than I at first had any reason to expect. From one indiscretion I proceeded to another, and my neglect, and even contempt, of the man to whom I had promised to give my hand, were so visible, that they could not avoid alarming his jealousy; though the approaching crisis, mine and my father's consent, and above all the insignificance of his rival, contributed greatly, I suppose, towards allaying those fears. An accident however happened, which entirely confirmed Glanmore's suspicions. 
 As I could not invent any plausible pretext for breaking off the match, and as I was resolved, at any rate, to gratify my present inclinations, I had consented to a proposal of an elopement made by Sir Harry, and which was to have been executed the very night preceding the day appointed for my marriage. The mysterious air which Glanmore observed the servants of Sir Harry to affect, and some preparations they were making, for they had
 
all received private orders, made him suspect there was something in agitation, which he had reason to dread, and which was necessary for him to discover. By bribes, and promises, he prevailed on one of them, whom he observed was more loquacious and significant than the rest, to repeat the orders he had received from Sir Harry; which were that Sir Harry's people were all to retire to their beds, sooner than usual, where, instead of undressing themselves, they were to wait till within a quarter of one o'clock, and then if every thing was quiet in the house, and Glanmore's family all in bed, they were to come down without their shoes, and with as little noise as possible, take Sir Harry's post chariot round to the corner of Sir Herbert's garden wall, and wait for their master, holding themselves in readiness for a journey. 
 Glanmore's passions were sufficiently alarmed by this intelligence: he had no room to doubt but that Sir Harry intended to carry me off by my own consent. Tormented and distracted with jealousy, hope, and fear, he at one time resolved to come immediately, and after upbraiding me with my infidelity, acquaint my father with it also; then changing his intentions, he put his pistols in his pockets to punish my lover for his perfidy. At last, however, he came to a resolution to wait till night, and plant himself, and some friends whom he could rely on, in such a situation as to be able to intercept us, if he found his fears confirmed, which
 
he could not yet thoroughly persuade himself were true. 
 Various and afflictive were the tumultuous feelings of the parties concerned in the transactions of this unhappy night. Glanmore's conduct proved the greatness of his torment: Sir Harry's, I believe, was the most placid: he had not sensibility enough to produce any violent agitation of either pain or pleasure. As for me, the nearer the time approached, the more irresolute and distracted was my mind: I never passed so horrid an interval. Sometimes my imagination represented to me the agony of Sir Herbert at my breach of faith and capricious conduct; at others, I beheld Glanmore upbraiding me, in all the pangs of despair, and hatred for my duplicity: nay so intolerably was I oppressed with the inconsistency of my conduct, and the terror of my guilt, that I started up three times with an intention to destroy myself, but had not sufficient resolution. At length, the hour arrived, and Sir Harry entered, conducted by my maid, as had been pre-concerted: but so great an impression had my fears made on me, that I wept, entreated, nay, at last absolutely refused to go. My lover was not thus to be diverted from his intentions: he reasoned, prayed, and at length swore he would not be so deceived, and catching hold of my arm, dragged me along with him; my fears of a discovery prevented me from taking courage to resist; whilst
 
his impetuous and violent conduct made me shudder at my own. 
 How shall I describe the horror of the moment, when just as Sir Harry was handing me into the chaise, he was seized and intercepted by Glanmore! "Traitor!" exclaimed the injured lover, trembling with rage, and fury in his aspect, "forego your worthless prize, and satisfy my wrongs. As for you," said he to Me, darting a look of wild despair and terror through my soul, "though I see my folly in contesting a single moment for so false, so light, so ungenerous a woman, yet, in your presence, will I punish this insignificant, this insiduous coxcomb;" then giving his antagonist a pistol, and telling him it was charged, without quitting his hold, bade him prepare to fire! I screamed! I flew to get between them ere the dreadful explosion! but in vain! They both fired! they both fell! 
 Good God! what tongue can tell, what pencil paint, what imagination can conceive, the wild, the tremendous despair of my countenance when, by the glimmering of the moon I beheld both my lovers weltering in their blood! I seized one of the pistols, and with a violent blow laid myself senseless for a moment on the earth; then starting up, and giving a frantic scream, I tore my hair, and face, while the servants and friends of the fallen, stood petrified with horror, unable to determine whether what they beheld were real or no. 
 The agitation my mind had undergone for some hours was so increased, by this shocking transaction, that I was carried home in violent hysterics, which were succeeded by weaknesses and faintings to such a degree, that it was thought at one time my life was in great danger. The youth and strength of my constitution, together with the almost miraculous news of the recovery of both the combatants, overcame my disorder; the ball of each had fortunately taken place in the shoulder, and by that means escaped a vital part. 
 Ever after this dreadful night the image of Sir Harry was accompanied with pain and disgust, and Glanmore, instead of ever renewing his claim, was frequently heard to declare, that he deemed himself exceedingly happy in having escaped an indissoluble connexion with a woman who was capable of so much injustice and ingratitude: for indeed he had been a very warm and assiduous lover, and afterwards proved himself a tender and indulgent husband. 
 We have since regarded each other with a sigh, tho' I had far the greatest reason, as my father, after this affair, peremptorily insisted upon my giving my hand to Strangely, who was now become earl of Wildham, and had renewed his addresses to me, but who, after his first transports, has continually upbraided me with my slights to him and crimes to others. Therefore I repeat, BEWARE OF COQUETRY. 
 
 
 
 
 
 MR. FORRESTER, (To his Daughter.) 
 You see, Julia, the effects of vanity and inconstancy, which between them produce coquetry. I have not, at present, any reason to fear you should become so weak as this lady was; however I would advise you, and all young ladies, to be cautious and particularly distrustful of themselves, in this point; as, if my observations have been true, it is the One in which they are most likely to err. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 And give me leave to observe, my friend, vanity, which is the source of coquetry, and other follies in the ladies, is a most baneful antidote to the prosperity of Men likewise: it makes them commit the most silly actions, and frequently betrays them into irretrievable mistakes. Rudolphus, a king of the Heruli, in a battle between his army and that of Tado, king of the Lombards, was so confident of success, that he staid feasting, in his tent, contenting himself with sending a person to an eminence, to observe the combat, and inform him when his troops should win the day, telling him at the same time, he would behead him if he brought bad news. The consequence of this vanity was, his army was defeated, and the messenger, afraid to return, left the foolish monarch to perish by the sword of the victors. 
 But the instances of men betrayed to destruction by their own vanity are innumerable. This passion makes us as ridiculous, at sometimes, as it does unfortunate at others. The king of Catona takes an oath, at his coronation, that it shall not rain unseasonably, neither shall there be famine or pestilence during his reign. We think this very strange; but what shall we say of the custom of England, which, in this age of reason and philosophy, obliges the monarch to call himself king of France, when all the world knows it to be false? The Cham of Tartary, is not more ridiculous or vain, who, when he has dined, causes it to be proclaimed by sound of trumpet, that, now he has finished His dinner, all the rest of the kings of the earth have leave to begin theirs. 
 I met with a little satirical essay, on this subject, which I think to the purpose. Here it is; do you read it, Charles, and do you, my children, observe how the author describes this passion to be the general weakness of humanity. Remark its different effects upon different dispositions, make the application to yourselves, and endeavour to avoid its influence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 VANITY, Or the VISION. 
 OF all the articles of vulgar faith perhaps none has greater influence than that of dreaming. Few old women are to be found who cannot give an immediate and copious explanation of all the freaks, vagaries, and inconsistencies which the mind, during her nocturnal labours, shall conceive. 
 Among the variety of dreamers in this world, the literary ones are not the least conspicuous. It is in vain that dreamers of this species shall with a serious face and long periphrasis, tell the readers how they became weary, and where and when they fell asleep. Every body knows that theirs are waking dreams. I shall take the liberty to relate one of these which I have lately had. 
 I thought I was sitting upon the cross which is placed upon the top of St. Paul's, amusing myself with contemplating the care, hurry, anxiety, and ambition, which were discoverable in the countenances of the crowd that were bustling beneath me. As I was applauding myself for the sagacity of my conjectures, and the ingenuity of my remarks, I began suddenly to wonder by what strange means I was carried thither, and whence I derived the power and resolution to behave with so much composure
 
in so perilous a situation: when turning my head, I beheld, at my right hand, a Being with wings to his shoulders, of a beauteous and most alluring countenance, and a radiant form. My surprize was so great that I found myself tumbling from the horrid precipice; but my preserver caught me by the arm, and by his smiles and assistance, banished my fears, and reinstated me with safety on my seat. 
 "Mortal," said he, "I am one of that order of spirits which, by men, are called Genii. My name is Hlalhlumhla, or, according to its signification in your language, the Vapour of Vanity. I am likewise called by some Glparhja, that is, the Principle of Action, alluding to the part I take in prompting men to hazardous and daring enterprizes. That you may have some knowledge of the power I possess, you shall, in part, feel its effects." Immediately as he said this, he breathed in my face, and his breath was sweeter than the meadow air while the hay is upon the ground. He had no sooner done so, than I felt myself elated, after a surprizing manner: I believed myself capable of performing any thing, and was going to leap from the height where I sat, confident of my ability, but was restrained by my protector, who, while he held me, touched my lips with his finger, and I instantly became sensible of my danger, and wondered at my temerity. 
 "Mighty Being," said I, bending as I spoke, "I tremble at my presumption; expose not thy
 
weak servant any more to such temptation." "Listen," said he, and fear not: "I will instruct thee." 
 "Next to the great spirit, I am the most powerful. I am the first of created beings; all others worship me, and those who affect the most to despise me hug me closest to their bosoms. Among men, none are so high or so low as not to feel my influence, and women pay me the most servile adoration. It is I who have made coblers kings, and kings coblers. I have breathed upon the ignorant, and they have become philosophers, poets, painters, heroes, mathematicians. It is I who have inspired men to build temples, and pull them down again. I accompanied Caesar into Gaul, and Alexander to the banks of the Ganges. I levelled the Alps to Hannibal, preached against the fear of pain or poverty to the Stoics, and sent Cincinnatus, with self-satisfaction, to the plough. I gave virtue to Aristides and Epaminondas, made Lycurgus a legislator, and taught Pyrrhus It is recorded of Pyrrhus, that he never prayed for encrease of wisdom, wealth, or empire; he asked only health Was this moderation or vanity? Did it not imply, "Give me health, and I'll ensure the others?" his prayers; and I was the daemon with whom Socrates boasted of his familiarity. Nor is it easy to determine whether I have been the occasion of most good or evil to mankind. I will cause thee to behold examples of each. The history of the actions of some of my votaries shall pass in quick succession
 
before thee; and I will enable thee to see and interpret." 
 As he said this, he plucked a feather from his wing and drew it across my eyes. The touch imparted power unexperienced before; and the greatest distance, the most solid matter, or impenetrable darkness, could no longer conceal objects from my sight or hearing. 
 "Behold," said Hlalhlumhla, "yonder country gentleman, whom we will call Marius. He is walking in his garden, surrounded by his children, for whom he has a particular affection, as he has likewise for their mother. He has riches enough to satisfy his wish; he delights in the character which he deserves it is that of a good and worthy man. He desires only the power to be useful and he enjoys it. I have inspired him with that portion of vanity which stimulates to virtue, and he is happy, he is beloved. Observe the change he is going to experience." The blue vapour issued from the mouth of the genius, and ran like lightning, to fulfil its destined course. It finds Marius reading that anecdote of Caesar, that tells us he fetched a deep sigh at beholding the statue of Alexander. He immediately becomes thoughtful; serenity vanishes from his countenance, his steps are short and interrupted; he reads the story again, and feels every thing that is related of Caesar. He entertains a vast opinion of his abilities, and wonders at the former inactivity of his temper. A vacancy happens in parliament
 
for a small borough in his neighbourhood. The money flies among the electors, and he is returned. He hurries to town, swelled with ambition, eager for fame, and reads and loads his memory with Gazettes, speeches and protests. Magna Charta, principles, patriotism, politics, ring an eternal change in his brain. He goes to the play, not for diversion, but to study action and emphasis. He labours to be an orator. Hark how he thunders in the senate; observe how he is feared, even while he is laughed at. He intrigues with the minority, he tampers with the ministry; he obtains a place, and he intrigues still. His thirst of preferment is insatiable, and he is as troublesome as unreasonable. He threatens, soothes, cringes, is the first at levees, the last at cabals, flatters this lord's mistress, and bows to that peer's valet; splashes through thick and thin, and delights to traverse the dirty alleys of ambition. Health, virtue, content, all are sacrificed. His wife desirous of his company and delighting in his love, follows him to town, but enjoys them not. A lord in great power sees her and becomes enamoured; makes large promises, and the abandoned wretch, her husband, listens with avidity to the infamous proposal, that flatters his ambition. Hear him commanding her to submit! behold her tears, her prayers, her just resentment of his wicked schemes! he expostulates, he entreats, he threatens and see! the knife is lifted up!" 
 I could no longer contain my emotion. I caught the genius by the hand, and tremblingly begged of him to allay the storm which he had raised. 
 "I will indulge you," said Hlalhlumhla, "tho' in the opinion of the world, I shall ruin his fortune, for he would certainly have made a shining character; he would have finished whatever he had undertaken, and would have scrupled no means to attain his end." 
 "Let us leave Marius restored to reason, and the proper duties of a man, and turn our eyes to yonder garret. You see the miserable wretch that fits shivering over the expiring embers, greedily devouring the morsel which his oeconomy saved from his last meal. Vanity is the source of his poverty. His father was a tradesman who had saved a competency by his industry, but anxious to see his son make a figure in the world, he resolved upon giving him a learned education, in which, he imagined, were included knowledge, riches, and power. Accordingly the boy had Greek and Latin whipped into him; and after scanning hexameters and pentameters, and drudging through logic, rhetoric, and the rest of the scholastic load, by which ordinary faculties, if they are obliged to carry it, become oppressed, and under which, common memories shrink; he, according to that portion of my influence which was given to him at his birth, began to be a coxcomb in verse; and, after discovering that my and thy, sure and pure, and, a few other insignificant words would jingle, and that a certain quantity of syllables would
 
measure a line, he fancied himself a poet. The fruits of his father's industry were devoured by those who paid the largest share of tribute to his maudlin muse. He wrote and published, and wrote again, and published again, and wondered at the world's stupidity. In proportion to the decrease of his finances was the increase of his malady. No province of poetry but has suffered an invasion from his fury. He has at this time piled up under his bed, three epic poems, seven tragedies, thirteen farces, which he calls comedies, all with dissertations, essays, apologues, prologues, epilogues, prefaces, advertisements to the reader and dedications, ready manufactured; besides satires, elegies, odes, pastorals, &c. &c. without number. He subsists at present by collecting paragraphs for news-papers, and occasionally filling up a vacancy in the Poet's Corner, which, "from his well heaped store," he is enabled to do at a moment's warning. I perceive by your countenance you commiserate his case, and are desirous I should undeceive him, that the poor man might set up school-master, or find some other rational method of employing his abilities in what the world would pronounce to be his proper sphere: but this would be doing him a real injury. At present he is happy; he lives in continual hope that the period is at hand when he shall burst like the sun from behind a cloud (to use one of his favourite similies) and astonish the world with the
 
effervescence of his rays. This hope is the cordial that makes the bitter pill of poverty palatable. 
 "Let us leave the poet," said Hlalhumhla, and turn to the man in a general's Uniform, whom you see fitting yonder with a huge folio before him. He is reading that part of the Roman History where the actions of Hannibal are celebrated: observe with what avidity his eyes run along the page, and the passions that usurp each other in his countenance. He is come to the battle of Cannae; fifty thousand men lie dead, without extorting a sigh; but he feels all the rapture of a hero, or mankiller, at the stratagem of the daggers Towards the latter part of the battle of Cannae, when Hannibal, by the stratagem of the retreat, had cut the Roman infantry to pieces, the latter placed all their hopes in the cavalry of the allies, which yet remained unbroken; but to these Hannibal sent 500 Numidian horse, with daggers concealed under their coats of mail, and gave them orders to surrender prisoners of war, which they obeyed; and being, as was supposed, placed by the Romans in the rear, they drew their concealed daggers, when the action became hot in the front, and fell upon them with such fury, that the Romans were put into irrecoverable confusion. , and sighs only for an opportunity of gaining reputation himself, by the like innocent method. He has a great genius for war, and the active spirit with which I inspired him, hurries his imagination "to search for the bubble honour in the cannon's mouth." It is matter of joy to him when human slaughter is
 
thus legally committed by the sword, to find that it has been dreadfully great in favour of the party whose commander attracts his admiration. A man without these sentiments of ambition, or whose vanity is directed to other objects, would shudder with horror, and dissolve in pity, should he traverse the field of blood, and view the herds of mangled bodies, and tortured dying wretches, who have all fell sacrifices to satisfy the pride of one man, or to procure fame for another; and would almost curse that pride, or that fame, which was unreasonable enough to require, and wicked enough to delight in a sacrifice so dreadful. But a man addicted to pity, according to our present mode of judging, is but ill qualified for a great king or a great hero. These people are composed of very inflammable matter, and would rather see the earth desolate, and the inhabitants cut away, than suffer the least indignity, or not procure themselves a great name. Yet such a strict regard have they for justice, that though the nations shall go to war because they have a fit of the spleen, though the finest, the healthiest, and ablest men shall be chosen, and sent to perish in desarts, starve in garrisons, and expose their bodies to every inclemency of earth, seas, and skies, because some other king or hero forgot one of their titles; yet I repeat, such a strict regard have they for justice, that should a starving wretch steal a loaf or a coat, because he was hungry or naked, he shall
 
be hanged for thus disturbing the peace and harmony which ought to subsist among men Alexander the Great having taken a pirate, and being about to condemn him to death, first spoke to him thus: "Why," said the hero, dost thou trouble the seas?" "And why," said the pirate, "dost thou trouble the whole earth? I, with one ship, seek my adventures, and am called a pirate: thou, with vast armies, warrest against the world, and art called an emperor. Where is the difference but in the name and means of doing mischief?" . 
 Enough of the general," said the genius, "I perceive a person whose history is a little extraordinary. Behold yonder shrivelled old fellow, his grey locks thinly shading his narrow face. It is Harpagus, the usurer. That man, who is now worth ninety thousand pounds, came to London without a shoe to his foot, or a shilling in his purse. His thirst of gain easily discovered itself by his care in ransacking the sweepings of the shop, where he found employment: the object at which his ambition aimed was pointed out by his frequently declaring, while a boy, that he did not fear being, some time or other, a very rich man; and his ability to gratify this vanity was evinced by his facility in turning pence into shillings, and shillings into pounds. His attention was so totally fixed to this one object, that those passions which lead other men into expence, and mostly become sources of dissipation to them, with him all contributed to increase his wealth, and promote his ultimate design. He fell in love but
 
how? Not with beauty or virtue, not with a generous heart, or witty head. It was with his master's sister, a rigid virgin of sixty-five, whose pounds sterling out-numbered her grey hairs, and who, though her ill humours and antiquated habits were very weighty, could not, in his opinion, preponderate against the five-hundred annual prize, which she drew from the old South Sea fund. His young companions laughed at him, but, when their extravagance sent them to borrow money of him at fifty per cent. he laughed in his turn. Gaming was a vice to which his natural covetousness addicted him; but here too the same passion that prompted preserved him, and his cunning quickly made him discover the rooks, and taught him to feather his nest with the pluckings of the pigeons A rook, in the language of the gaming table, signifies a sharper, and a pigeon one who is ignorant of their tricks, and is imposed upon. . His life has been, with scarce a deviation, a life of rapacity and care. His ideas of justice were, and are, that he has a right to cheat every one who will let him, and if any man cheat him, he will hang him if he can. He never counted that man his friend whom he he did not get something by, and he always proportioned the friendship to the gift: still loving those best who gave him most. When he set out in life, he thus said to himself, 'How famous should I be at my death if I could become richer than the 'squire
 
 
 
 
 
who is said to be worth seven hundred and fifty pounds a year!' His vanity has increased with his wealth, and his hopes are all fixed at present on living long enough to make his ninety a plumb. Thus he has lived wretched, and will die miserable, only to gain a pleasure which he can never enjoy, namely, that of having people's admiration after his death, and for this purpose he willingly suffers their detestation while he lives. What will not vanity prompt men to undertake? It will set one man to build a pyramid, and send another half over the globe to measure it. It has not less influence in the placing of a patch, than in the disposal of an army. It causes some to spend their lives in rioting and pleasures, and others in cares, toils, and torments, and, what is more extraordinary, converts these very torments into pleasures." 
 The genius was proceeding, when a sudden fright seized me, and I fancied myself falling from the precipice. The terror that this occasioned, awoke me with a start, and when I came to myself, I drew this moral from my dream It is better to do one good action that merits the applause of a benevolent heart, than twenty splendid ones, to catch the praise which a false judging world shall bestow! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DIALOGUE V. 
 
 Mr. EGERTON. 
 OUR reading and conversation has been lately upon the effects of Selfishness, Benevolence and Vanity. I think, therefore, we cannot better elucidate these subjects, than by taking a view of Temperance, which if rightly understood and practis'd, will undoubtedly promote the virtues, and wean us from the vices of which we have been speaking. I have often told you, and I must contine to remind you, my children, that almost all our wants are artificial. There is no wealth so enormous as not to leave the possessor poor, if he does not prescribe bounds to his imaginary necessities. I scarcely need inform you, that the greatest part of those things, which among a certain description of men are supposed absolutely requisite to existence, are totally superfluous; invented by caprice, claimed by folly, and too often obtained by injusstice. I cannot better point out how unnecessary these things are to real happiness and true grandeur, than by describing the temperance and simplicity which some of the noblest and most exalted characters of antiquity maintained. 
 Aristides, one of the greatest men Athens ever produced, lived in a state of the most rigid temperance, and paid so little regard to wealth, that when he died he was obliged to be buried at the states charge; yet no person can suppose, were history silent on the subject, that he who had so often, and so essentially contributed to the prosperity of the commonwealth, wanted opportunities of enriching himself. This was a still greater virtue in him, because his origin was poor and mean, and therefore he was the more likely to be tempted by wealth, which is too often supposed to include power, fame and all those qualities at which men so eagerly grasp. His acknowledged justice procured him to be elected treasurer of the public money, and his inflexible adherence to oeconomy in this trust, occasioned Themistocles to accuse him of malversation, for which supposed crime the giddy multitude condemned him in a severe fine. For Themistocles, though a great man, wanted the virtues of Aristides, and was angry because he was prevented from plundering the public. This sentence, however, was reversed by the wiser part of the citizens, and Aristides was elected to the same office for the following year. Angry at the treatment he had received, and resolved to shew the Athenians their folly, he neglected to examine the accounts of those Who had the expenditure of the public money, and pretended to disapprove of his former rigor. These people who had benefited by his connivance began
 
then to extol him to the skies, and interested themselves that he might continue in his office; but on the day of election, just as they were going unanimously to put him in nomination, Aristides rose, with indignation in his countenance, and addressed them thus: "Oh Athenians, I am more ashamed of the honour you intend me this day, than of the sentence you passed against me last year; and it is with concern and sorrow I see, that it is more meritorious with you to oblige ill men, than faithfully to discharge a trust. When I managed your treasure as became an honest man, I was treated like a villain; but now that I have left it to the discretion of these public robbers, I am proclaimed a most excellent person and an amiable patriot." 
 Neither was the temperance of Aristides less conspicuous as a judge, than in his former capacity. As he was sitting one day to decide a cause between two private persons, one of them endeavoured to influence him, by beginning to relate the many injuries his antagonist had in his life done Aristides, when he immediately interrupted him by saying, "Tell me friend, what injuries he has done to You, for it is your cause, and not mine, that I sit here to determine upon." 
 I might quote numberless instances of a like nature, not only of Aristides, but of Phocion, Pelopidas, Epaminondas, Fabricius, and many others, the examples of all of whom prove that temperance is the virtue of a truly great man, and that 
 
either when it tends to enervate the mind, or to bring the slightest dependance, or disgrace upon the receiver, should always be rejected with positive and unremitted firmness. Vulgar and narrow minded men are dazzled with the splendor of riches, the wise despise them, except as they afford the means of doing good. When Timagoras returned to Athens, from his embassy to Artaxerxes king of Persia, one Epicrates, a porter, who had been in the menial train of Timagoras, and had enriched himself by the king's presents, proposed in an assembly of the people, that the Athenians instead of electing nine archons or governors, should chuse twelve poor citizens and send ambassadors to Persia, in order to be enriched by the gifts of Artaxerxes. The absurdity of this piece of low cunning was so exceedingly evident that it set the whole assembly a laughing. 
 The following story of the Salutiferous Fountain is entirely applicable to the present subject. 
 
 
 
 
 INTEMPERANCE, Or the Journey of AZIBAH, in search of the Salutiferous Fountain. 
 TOWARDS the conclusion of the twelfth year of the reign of Hallam, monarch of Indostan, Ozmah, captain of the palace guards, came into the chamber of , the son of Hedan, near the time of the
 
second prayer, and said: "Azibah, son of Hedan, I wish the command I am going to execute, may prove advantageous to thee. Give me thy sabre, and follow me to the sultan; for such is his pleasure." The moment Azibah heard these words, he fell prostrate, and, after imploring the protection of the Prophet, said to Ozmah, put thy hand upon my head; the Sultan is master of my life, and I am his slave! At the same time he delivered up his sabre and followed him. At the bottom of the stairs, ten guards were posted, who environed Azibah, and conducted him into the presence of Hallam. 
 The monarch had with him Serah, general of his forces, and Naran, chief of the Imans. Ozmah presented him Azibah's sword, and said: Light of the faithful, Azibah, without the least resistance, hath submitted himself to thy orders: may thine enemies imitate his example. Though Azibah, was not conscious of having offended, yet his spirits were seized with terror: he, however, armed himself, so as to prevent any appearance of it, in his countenance. As soon as the Sultan saw Azibah at his feet, he said, "Son of Hedan, let us fall down before Him, who never dies." These words increased the terror of Azibah. The Sultan, the General, the Iman, the Captain of the Guards, kneeled down, bowed their faces towards the ground, and glorified the Prophet. Azibah, uncertain of his fate, thus implored the protection
 
of Mahomet: "If my resolutions were sincere when I went to pay honour to thy shrine, and to bedew with my tears the holy mount Arafat; if I have made it hitherto the chief delight of my mine eyes, to read over the divine book, be now my support. The computation of my days will soon perhaps expire. I already see the dark and frightful angel ready to receive me. Remember the faith I repose in thee. There is only one God, and thou art his Prophet." 
 Prayer being ended, the Sultan rose up; and, turning towards Azibah, said, "Son of Hedan, I have resolved upon making thee undertake a long voyage; bow down thine head." "Father of Musselmen," answered Azibah, "the voyage will be certainly long, and without return, which we must all expect to make at different times. May the most mighty and merciful God multiply thy years." Having pronounced these words, he stretched forth his neck to meet the fatal stroke. The Sultan drew the sabre, and extended his arm; but instead of severing Azibah's head from his body, he returned the blade into its sheath. Such unexpected clemency drew from the assistants loud acclamations of joy. Azibah again opened his eyes, which darkness, the forerunner of death, had already closed: and Hallam, with a pleasant aspect, embraced him. Having placed him between Naran and Serah, over-against his sopha, he made signs for Serah to speak to him. 
 "My lord, said Serah, I have talked with a man, who was three hundred and forty years old, who had ten more to live. He was oppressed with chains, in the King of Golconda's camp, after his defeat; and the victory you obtained, over that Prince, gave this person his liberty. I detained him three days, which hardly sufficed to relate the revolutions he had seen, during the course of his long life. I did not think proper to keep him any longer, so I gave him ten roupees, with liberty to go where he pleased. He was a native of Bengal, and was called the old-man of that place. His eyes were much sunk, his voice was clear, his hair and beard nicely combed out, and as white as snow. Though his visage was full of wrinkles, it was enlivened with a florid red, and easily might one discover in it that gaiety which naturally accompanies perfect health. Being asked, what means he used to attain so very advanced an age; he told me his father, who lived till he was three hundred and fifty years old, had bequeathed three doses of the water brought from the island of Borico, by virtue of which, he had been thrice restored to his former youth. I cautiously desired him to tell me, in what part of the world this island was, and whether it was permitted to obtain any of the water of this fountain of life. He protested, he could not answer either of the questions, and that he had several times proposed the same demands to his father, but never could be satisfied in them. I then strenuously pressed him to inform
 
me, by what means his father had found out so surprising a water: he always made answer, it was a present from VICHNOU, a god to whom he had for a long time sacrificed to. This, my Lord, was all I could gather from the old man. So fabulous a conclusion did not a little contribute to make me despise him; for, after what manner soever I questioned him, he still persisted in the same story." 
 The Sultan, perceiving Serah had done speaking, looked stedfastly on Azibah, and said to him: "Son of Hedan, if the voyage I seemed to threaten thee with, could not make thee afraid, why shouldest thou dread going to the island of Borico in my service?" "Most potent of Kings," answered Azibah, "I fear none on earth but thee. This instant, I will depart to search every corner of the world, and, if I fail to bring thee the water thou desirest, then sever my head from my body, and end the life of a creature, no longer worthy to live." The Sultan, having strictly charged all present to conceal the secret, ordered Naran to provide every thing necessary for the journey. 
 The next morning, as soon as Aurora had withdrawn the curtains of the east, and painted the mountain tops with glowing purple, Azibah left the city of Agra, and joined a caravan, going to Cambaye. He had no equipage, and his dress but ordinary, though he carried about him, in gold and jewels, more than the value of a common city. He generally let the company pass on before him, that he might enjoy the greater liberty of reflecting on
 
the method of executing his commission. He was extremely pensive, for he was persuaded of the impossibility of success, and, therefore, looked upon the expedition, as a banishment. "I am going, said he to himself, to wander I know not whither, in search of a fountain which has, perhaps, no existence. And, even if it have, I am entirely ignorant of the country in which it is situated; and am now, perhaps, travelling the direct opposite way." These discouraging thoughts, however, at last, began to give way to more pleasing sensations, and he determined either to find the fountain, or convince himself that all search was in vain. He had not travelled three days, with the caravan, before he perceived he was not the only person who had avoided company to indulge reflection. A young man, well mounted, of a very agreeable aspect, seemed to be much in the same melancholy mood as he himself was. 
 To meet with companions in misfortune, alleviates our grief. Azibah was greatly pleased to find an associate in affliction, and determined to make him acquainted with the nature of his journey. Azibah approached him, and, after a short conversation on general subject, said to him, "Sir, I perceive that your spirits are oppressed by the hand of affliction: mine are also in the same condition. Let us therefore mutually impart to each other the causes, from which our afflictions flow; perhaps each may derive advantage from the counsel of the other." To this, Sebah, (which was the
 
name of the young man) readily consenting, Azibah acquainted him with the commands he had received from the Sultan; intimating, at the same time, that he looked upon the fountain of Borico, as a mere chimera. 
 Sebah listened with attention to Azibah's relation, and after a minute's silence, said, "Sir, I have accidentally acquired some knowledge of the situation of that famous fountain, which I shall gladly impart to you. I am the son of Rephan, a physician, well known in Sciras. And I need not acquaint you, that all the youths of that city delight in dancing, or playing on some instrument. One evening, when the heats of the season rendered the night more pleasant than the day, I left my father's house, to enjoy the refreshing breeze, and played on a flagelet, as I passed along the streets. In my return home, I heard the window of a spacious house open, and, directing mine eyes towards the place, I saw, by means of the light of the moon, which was then shining in her greatest splendor, a most beautiful lady, who seemed to listen to my music very attentively. Pleased with the adventure, I stood still  continued playing, till she withdrew; which wa  ot till some considerable time after I first saw her. I took particular notice of the house, determining to return the succeeding evening; but, just as I reached home, an arrow passed whizzing by my ear; I started, and looking back, perceived a man making towards me, armed with a bow in
 
his left-hand, and a long javelin in his right. As he approached, he cried out, "Traitor! though I have missed thee once, I shall be more fortunate a second time!" Seeing him alone, I took courage, drew my sabre, and, having happily parried his thrust, gave him two wounds in the breast. He instantly dropped, and begged his life; telling me, he was son to the Bashaw of Sciras. I immediately sent a surgeon to his assistance; but, knowing I had every thing to fear from the fury of his father, I stayed no longer in the city, than to provide myself with a horse and money. 
 I followed the high-road, till nature, overwhelmed with fatigue, required repose, when I quitted it, and took a path between two mountains, the end of which terminated in a wood. Alighting, and tying my horse to the branch of a cedar, I laid myself down at the foot of a large palm-tree, and slept till Aurora visited the earth with her enlivening beams. On my waking, I was much surprised to hear the voice of a man speaking in the following manner: 
 "Now is the precious hour, child, that the genii appear under different forms to Princes who delight in executing justice, and to tyrants who deserve punishment. O child! couldest thou, as clearly as I, look into the events of this moment, then wouldest thou behold some employed in the dark shades of Mezanderan, to drive the lions and tygers from their dens, in defence of the innocent in oppression;
 
and admire the facility of others, in rendering the hydras and griffins tame and familiar." 
 I had no longer patience to listen to so strange a discourse, without being curious to see the person that delivered it. Advancing softly, from one tree to another, I came to a pretty thick grove of laurels, where, concealing myself, I had the advantage of discovering, without being perceived, a grave old man, dressed in a long brown robe, and a young maid sitting near him, in a blue veil, which covered every part of her, except her face and hands. Her eyes were modestly fixed on the old man, whom she seemed listening to, with great attention. I shewed myself, and by that means interrupted their conversation. At my appearance, the young maid drew her veil over her face, and the old man arose and met me. "You behold, said I, a traveller distressed by hunger and fatigue, compelled to crave your assistance." "By Ali! replied he, thou art most heartily welcome; the sages were never unhospitable. The charity I shew you, will serve as a new instruction for my daughter. Go, refresh yourself in our retreat, we will join you in an hour." He shewed me, at the same time, a little path, which conducted me, after several turnings, into a grotto. 
 Though the entrance was very narrow and obscure, yet it was sufficiently light within, and contained several apartments. A slave, to whom I declared my distress, and the charitable intention of his master, set before me raisins, pistachoes, fresh
 
dates, white bread, and an excellent liquor from the palm-tree. Whilst I was employed in satisfying the cravings of nature, I desired him to go in search of my horse, describing, as well as I could, the place where I left it. The slave accordingly departed; and, after I had eaten and drank sufficiently, my curiosity prompted me to visit every corner of so romantic a habitation. The most remote cavity of the grotto formed a cabinet, filled with books, talismans, and figures of all kinds of plants and animals. Here I amused myself for some time, and casting my eyes towards the farther part of the cavity, I saw, against the rock, the following inscription, in letters of gold: "Reader, whoever thou art, that hast been favoured to approach this secret recess of the sages, ponder this, and be wise. Reverence the most High, seek wisdom, love mercy, and be a shield of defence to the innocent. Then shall thy years be prolonged, unassisted by the waters of Borico; nor shall any plagues or misfortunes approach thine habitation." While I was attentively perusing this inscription, the old man approached me, saying, "Son, let the precepts of that writing be engraven, in living characters, on the table of thy memory." I thanked him for his kind advice, and desired him to explain what was meant by the waters of Borico. "My son, said he, in the kingdom of Sofala, in Africa, is a large lake, in the midst of which are several islands, and particularly one much larger than the rest, called
 
Borico. In this island is a fountain, whose nature is endued with the amazing property of restoring youth to those who drink of it. On the borders of this fountain grow many beautiful trees, which fill the air with a delightful fragrance, and are always loaded with the most delicious fruits. But the passage to this fountain is guarded by leopards, so that it is almost impossible to approach it." 
 The old man having finished his explanation of this mystery, after returning him my thanks for his kindness and hospitality, I took my leave of him, mounted my horse, and, after wandering a long time through unknown parts, I had the good fortune to join this caravan, and to find in it a companion in misfortunes. Azibah listened with the utmost attention to Sebah's narrative, being agreeably surprised at so unexpected a discovery, and determined to direct his course to Africa, in search of the fountain of Borico. 
 At their arrival at Cambaye, Sebah was informed, that the Bashaw's son was not only recovered from his wounds, but also become his friend. On hearing this agreeable news, Sebah set out on his return to Sciras, and Azibah, having procured a ship, sailed for the coast of Africa. After a long and tedious search through uninhabited deserts, he had the good fortune to discover the lake, in the midst of which the island Borico was situated. Being arrived at the side of the lake, he prevailed on some fishermen to carry him to the island. They did all in their
 
power to dissuade him from such a rash attempt, by assuring him that it was only inhabited by wild beasts, from which it would be impossible for him to escape. These reasons were lost on Azibah, he persisted in his resolution; and the fishermen, finding it in vain to oppose him, landed him on the island. 
 Here he wandered, seeking in vain the salutiferous fountain. Despairing of success, he set himself down in a valley, and fell asleep. When he awaked, he beheld a beautiful lady dressed in the habit of the country, approaching him; who, with a great deal of sweetness, asked him what he sought. He acquainted her with the commands of the Sultan, and the reasons which induced him to come thither in search of the fountain. "Since you consult me, answered she, it will be your own fault, if you do not succeed. As you go out of this valley, you will find a crystal stream flowing from a beautiful fountain, and discharging itself into a large river, not far distant from its source. At the bottom of the fountain you will find a little blue pebble, which you must not fail to take up; then follow the stream, till you arrive at the river, and direct your course along the bank of it, till it divides itself into two branches, and forms an island, or rather garden, in the middle of which is the salutiferous fountain. Over an arm of the river, there is a marble bridge; its passage is defended by twenty-seven leopards. Before you come in
 
sight of them, put the little blue pebble in your mouth, and pass boldly over the bridge, for the pebble will render you invisible. When you approach the fountain, take up what water you intend, and return immediately. But be careful not to eat of the fruits of luxuriant trees growing on the margin of the fountain." The lady, after uttering these words, difappeared; and Azibah took the path she directed. 
 The fountain, the pebble, the river, the bridge, and the leopards presented themselves successively to his view. As he entered the garden, he was saluted with an odour inexpressibly ravishing, proceeding from the flowers and fruits, which it produced in the greatest profusion. Near the margin of the salutiferous fountain was a tree eminently taller than the rest, loaded with fruit of so enchanting an aspect, that even imagination itself can hardly paint any thing so beautiful. Azibah, unable to withstand the temptation, took the pebble but of his mouth, plucked off the fruit, and began to eat. The taste was delicious and enchanting; but, alas! the pleasure was but of short duration. The leopards now cast their furious eyes upon him, made towards him with incredible swiftness, and were just on the point of tearing him to pieces, when the lady, who had before directed him, suddenly appeared. At her presence, these fierce creatures returned to their station, and Azibah prostrated himself at her feet, endeavouring to express his repentance and gratitude. "You are now,
 
said she, lost to all hopes of success; acknowledge your fault, and spend the remainder of your life in solitude." Having said this, she took him by the hand, and, after conducting him beyond the bridge, charged him to return the same way that he came, and to put the pebble in its place, as he passed by the fountain; which he had no sooner done, than the whole vanished from his sight; neither bridge, river, nor fountain were any longer visible; and, to add to his astonishment, he found himself on the top of the mountain of Arafat. 
 Thus was the unfortunate Azibah, through his own folly, disappointed, when he thought the object, he had pursued through so many difficulties, within his reach. And hence we should learn to govern our passions and appetites; for, if we suffer them to prevail, all our resolution, assiduity, and perseverance, in any undertaking, will be rendered abortive. Health, honour, and reputation will be sacrificed to the gratification of some mean and unworthy passion; and, like Azibah, for the momentary pleasure of tasting one delicious morsel, lose the salutiferous waters of Borico. 
 
 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 You see in this tale, my children, the effects of intemperance painted in an ingenious though romantic manner; and the lives of the illustrious men I pointed out to you before, will convince you of the necessity of its opposite, in obtaining true renown. 
 
 
 
 MRS. EGERTON. 
 And that it may come still more forcibly to your bosoms, here, William, do you read this account given by an Englishman, one of ourselves, who has very pathetically described, from his own experience, both the one and the other. 
 
 
 
 
 WEALTH and its CONSEQUENCES. 
 I WAS the second son of a wealthy gentleman, who reserved the bulk of his fortune for my elder brother, so that my only provision was a tolerable education, and a commission in the army: but being soon weary of a soldier's life, I sold out at the commencement of the present American war, and though my fortune arising from that sale was but inconsiderable, I pleased myself with the idea of independence, and determined to enjoy it, by living within my income. Take away such a determination, and there can be no true independence in the most affluent circumstances. 
 My father had by this time resigned his breath; I had no parental home to which I could retire, and therefore set up my rest in a country town, where I had been formerly quartered with my regiment, and had made some agreeable acquaintances. There I passed my time according to my heart's desire. I fished, fowled, and hunted with the gentlemen of the neighbourhood, who entertained me in their houses with
 
the most cordial hospitality. I walked, I chatted, I danced, and played at cards with their wives and daughters. Delightful excursions and amusing parties of pleasure were planned and executed every day. The time stole away insensibly: I knew no care; I felt no disorder; I inherited from nature a vigorous constitution, a happy serenity of temper, and was distinguished among my friends as the best humoured fellow in the world. 
 In the midst of these enjoyments, my heart was touched by the amiable qualities of a young lady, who was content to unite her fate with mine, contrary to the inclination, and without the consent of her father, who possessed a very large fortune. He resented her marriage with such perseverance of indignation, as never to admit her into his presence; nor even at his death forgave her for the step she had taken. His displeasure, however, affected us the less, as we found happiness in our mutual passion, and knew no wants, for my wife inherited from an aunt a legacy of eighteen hundred pounds, the interest of which, together with my little income, was sufficient to answer our desires. 
 We found great satisfaction in contriving plans for living snug upon our income, and enjoyed unspeakable pleasure in executing the scheme to which we had given the preference. Chance presented us with an opportunity to purchase a small, though neat and convenient house, with about twenty acres of land, in an agreeable rural situation, and there our
 
time was parcelled out in a succession of tasks, for improving a large farm that we rented, and cultivating a sweet little garden, laid out on a gentle slope, the foot of which was watered by a branching rivulet of pure, transparent water. Although heaven had not thought proper to indulge us with children, we were favoured with every other substantial blessing, and every other circumstance of rural oeconomy proved a source of wealth and satisfaction. 
 The labours of the field, the little domestic cares of the barn-yard, the poultry, and the dairy, were productive of such delights as none of your readers, except those who are enamoured of a country life, will conceive. I cannot remember those peaceful scenes of innocence and tranquillity without regret; they often haunt my imagination, like the ghost of departed happiness. Within the bosom of this charming retreat we lived, in a state of uninterrupted enjoyment, until our felicity was invaded by two unexpected events, at which, I am afraid, we shall always have cause to repine. My nephew, who had succeeded to my father's estate, died of the smallpox; and a few weeks after this incident, my wife's only brother broke his neck in leaping a five barred gate; so that we found ourselves, all at once, in possession of a very opulent fortune, and violently transported from that situation for which our tempers had been so well adapted. 
 In the first flutter and agitation of mind, occasioned by this unhoped for accession, we quitted our
 
romantic solitude, and rushed into all the pageantry of high life. Thus irresistibly carried away by the vortex of dissipation, we grew giddy in a whirl of unnatural diversions; we became enamoured of tinsel liveries, equipage, and all the frippery of fashion. Instead of tranquillity, health, a continued flow of satisfaction, and a succession of rational delights, which we formerly derived from temperance, exercise, the study of nature, and the practice of benevolence, we now tasted no pleasure but what consisted in the gratification of idle vanity, and were tossed for ever on a sea of absurd amusements, by such loud storms of riot and tumult, as drowned the voice of reason and reflection, and overwhelmed all the best faculties of the soul. We deserted nature, sentiment, and true taste, to lead a weary life of affectation, folly, and intemperance: our senses became so depraved, that our eyes were captivated with glitter, and our ears with clamour; while our fancy dwelt with pleasure on every gew-gaw of gothic extravagance. We entertained guests whom we despised; we visited friends whom we did not love, and invited company whom we could not esteem. We drank wines that we could not relish, and ate victuals which we could not digest. We frequented concerts which we did not understand, plays which we did not like, and diversions which we could not enjoy. Our house might have been termed the Temple of Uproar. Card tables were the shrines, and the votaries
 
seemed agitated by the daemons of envy, spite, rage, vexation, and despair. In a word all was farce and form. All was a phantasm, and a hideous dream of incoherent absurdities. 
 These pleasures, like brandy to a dram-drinker, have lost their effect; we have waked from the intoxication, to a due sense of our miserable condition; for the vigour both of mind and body is quite impaired. With respect to each other, we find ourselves in a state of mutual disgust; and all the enjoyments of life we either taste with indifference, or reject with loathing. For my own part, I am overwhelmed with what the French call Pennui, a distemper for which there is not a name in the English language. It may be understood, however, from the following lines of the poet 
 Thee, too, my Paridel, she saw thee there, 
 Stretch'd on the rack of a too easy chair; 
 And heard thy everlasting yawn confess, 
 The pains and penalties of idleness. 
It is not a common vacancy of thought, or an ordinary languor of the nerves, that I labour under, but a confirmed imbecillity of mind, and a want of relish, attended with a thousand uneasinesses, which render life almost insupportable. I sleep without refreshment; I am fatigued without labour; I am scarce risen when I wish the day was done; and when night comes, I long for morning. I eat without appetite, and drink without exhilaration:
 
exercise affords no spirits; conversation no amusement; reading no entertainment, and diversion no pleasure. It is not from affectation, but an acquired insensibility, that I see Falstaff without a smile, and The Orphan without emotion. I endeavour to kill the time by shifting continually the scene of dissipation, but I am close pursued by disgust: all is disappointment, insipid, nauseous, or shocking. My temper is grown so fretful and peevish, that I quarrel by turns with my servants and myself; even she who was once the delight of my eyes, and the joy of my heart, is now become the subject of perpetual disquiet. I harbour wishes which I dare not approve: my heart palpitates with passions which I am ashamed to avow. I am tormented by a thousand petty grievances, which rise like angry tumours, from the ebullitions of a soured disposition; and incidents that would move the mirth of other men, are to me productive of choler and anxiety. 
 I have given this account of myself, as a lesson which I fear mankind will not learn, as a warning of dangers into which, whenever they have an opportunity, they will too eagerly rush. I speak this generally, for I confess I am not without hope, that some very, very few, may be wise enough to profit by my example, and either be happy in mediocrity, or employ the redundancies of riches to better purposes, than in supplying the foolish and incoherent whims and caprices of fashionable folly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DIALOGUE VI. 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 I HAVE frequently spoken to you, my children, of the many examples which history affords of those who have become eminent by their great qualities. I have endeavoured to divert while my aim has been to instruct; and in giving you sometimes real, and sometimes fictitious stories, have taught you what you ought to do and suffer in your future commerce with the world, without exhibiting the forbidding countenance of a dry and harsh preceptor. It is my wish to continue this practice, to inspire you with the ardor of emulation, and to convince you, from facts, that virtue is its own reward. It has been my custom too, in order to diversify the scene, to let you indulge, occasionally, in the wild fictions of romance; for I have long observed of myself, that I can still read the most romantic tales, if ingeniously connected, with a fort of surprize and curiosity, that lead me insensibly beyond the limits of nature, and transport me into a kind of enchanted land, in which, for a time, I take up a delightful abode. I am sensible that with young people, of your age, this effect is much stronger. The vagaries of fancy, like "the poet's eye in a fine fit of phrenzy rolling, traverse the heavens and earth, embodying forth the forms of
 
things unknown, and giving to airy nothing a local habitation and a name." These, if not permitted too often, so as to blunt the imagination by a too repeated appeal to probability, are some of the happiest delusions of life. 
 Eastern tales are, many of them, of this sort; but there is this difference between them: those which are composed at present, by modern authors, generally are intended to convey a particular moral, whereas the old ones, I mean the Arabian Nights, the Persian Tales, &c. mean only to amuse. These latter, it is true, do likewise inculcate morality; they cannot avoid it; all human events do the same; but then it is in a diffuse and different way. I make no scruple of reading the former kind in this little society, because they promote my plan; the others, for the reasons I have just given, I use more sparingly, and only for the sake of variety. This is not the first time, my children, I have hinted to you, that I think it proper to explain myself thus, that you may not have reason to suppose I act capriciously. I fit among you in the sacred character of Father, Guide, and Instructor. Nature, reason, and custom, have allotted me a certain portion of power, and I wish to convince you, that it is my endeavour, as well as my duty, to employ that power in promoting your present and future prosperity. 
 As I was looking through the Persian Tales this morning, in order to see if I could find any thing proper for our evening-meetings, I met, among
 
other things, with the voyage of Aboulfaouaris, in which, though intermixed with the familiar incidents of real life, there is an air of invention and sublimity that has sometimes a grand effect. It is rather long: you had better, therefore, two or three of you, read by turns, and then tell me if you are of my opinion. As I observed before, there is seldom any sole and particular moral to be gained from this kind of stories; the virtue, however, that is most conspicuous in the following narrative, as well as the necessity of that virtue in the situations described, is Fortitude. 
 
 
 
 
 FORTITUDE, Or the singular Adventures of ABOULFAOUARIS, surnamed the GREAT TRAVELLER. PART I. 
 I AM the son of a master of a ship of Basra, and my name is Aboulfaouaris. My father, ever since my infancy, made me attend him in the voyages he made in the Indian seas: so that, at twelve years old, I knew a great many of the islands that lie in the vast extent of them. He grew wealthy, employed his money in trade, and in less than ten years became one of the richest merchants of Basra. 
 One day he said to me, son, I have an important account to settle with my correspondent at the isle
 
of Ceylon: I am resolved to send you into that country to make an end of the affair. Whatever regret I might have to leave my father, the desire I had of seeing the famous city of Serendib made me accept the commission he offered me with joy: indeed I had been there before, but was not then advanced enough in years to make observations on its beauty. I set out in a short time, and embarked in the port of Basra. 
 We had the good fortune to reach Ceylon without any mischievous accident. The first thing I did was to enquire for my father's correspondent. There was no body in the city of Serendib who did not know Signior Habib: he was one of the richest traders of all the island, and a very honest man. He gave me such a reception, as I might expect from the best friend my father had. 
 As he perfectly understood business, and meant to do nothing but what was just, we finished our accounts in a few days. At leisure hours I viewed the rarities of the city, which are numerous: I instructed myself in the laws of the people, their occupations and government. In short, at the end of five or six weeks, my affairs being over, and my curiosity fully satisfied, I prepared for my return, and waited not long for an opportunity. A vessel of Surat, which had arrived at Serendib to exchange goods, was ready to put to sea, and I was to embark in her. 
 The day before my departure, as I was returning to my host about noon, a lady passed by, finely shaped, richly cloathed, and followed by a slave, who carried some things that she had been buying. A thick veil screened the beauty of her face, but I was struck with the grandeur of her air, and the majesty of her mien. I stopt to consider her, and could not forbear crying out in my transport; What a lovely creature! she is without doubt the king's mistress. She stopt with some surprise, and looked upon me very earnestly; then continued her walk, without appearing to be either pleased or displeased with the freedom I had taken. I paused a good while, reflecting on the circumstance; and, much agitated by the emotions she had caused in me, began to feel what I had never felt before. 
 Wholly filled with this idea, a slave accosted me. I remembered to be the same that followed the lady: and the sight of him redoubled my concern: What would you have with me, friend? said I. Sir, answered he, with great respect, I have orders to desire you to follow, where I shall have the honour to conduct you. If you come from your mistress, replied I, altogether amazed, I shall submit to her commands; I will readily obey them, whatever fate is prepared for me. My mistress, answered the slave, hath not intrusted me with her intentions; but if you comply with her request, I cannot believe you will repent it. 
 In vain did I represent to myself that I was to set off next day, and ought to think of nothing but my departure. I followed the slave in spite of all that might happen; he led me through unfrequented streets, till we came to a palace: then conducted me to a spacious apartment, magnificently furnished, and desired me to wait. I was too much affected to busy myself about any thing I saw; I thought of nothing but the mistress of the palace. 
 At last she appeared, and I found her as beautiful as her shape had promised: her jewels and dress added to her charms, which, indeed, had little need of their assistance. I was confounded  she perceived it and smiled; then placed herself upon a sofa, like a little throne, while her women ranked themselves upon the right and left. 
 Come near young gentleman, said she, with great sweetness; you seem to be a stranger: I will venture to tell you, that the stars incline me to wish you well. Should you render yourself deserving of my good opinion, I may give you leave to aspire to please me. 
 Ah, my sultaness! cried I, throwing myself at her feet, do I understand you right? To what pitch of fortune are you pleased to raise a stranger, who hath no other merit than to acknowledge you adorable? So much the better, said she, interrupting me, the favour will be the greater, the  believe you merit it. Inform me of w country you
 
are, what your birth, and upon what account you came to Serendib. 
 I fully satisfied her curiosity; but when I said I was to go on board the next day, in order to return home, she discovered great concern. What, Aboulfaouaris, said she, hare you a design to depart so soon? Hath not the finest island of the Indies, charms enough to detain you longer? Princess, replied I, the city of Serendib, without doubt, can engage eyes more difficult to please than mine; but what wonders soever are to be seen within the compass of these walls, I should withdraw myself without difficulty, if this day had not offered to my sight what is more capable of detaining me. You no longer continue then, replied the lady smiling, in the resolution of a sudden departure? After the glorious hopes, answered I, that you give me reason to conceive, think you, my queen, that I can have other inclinations than what you are pleased to inspire me with? You cannot fail, said she, with sentiments like these, to please me. 
 Having said this, she bade me sit down on the sofa: I made some difficulty, till she said my refusal would displease her. She then informed me her name was Canzada; that she was daughter to one of the prime visiers of the king of Ceylon; that the death of her father had given her the right to dispose of herself; that the first lords of the country had paid her their addresses, but that she was yet disengaged. She told me likewise that my person
 
had struck her; that her father had amassed immense riches; and that it would be my own fault if I refused to share them with her. 
 I returned my acknowledgments to her in the most submissive terms. Our conversation was interrupted by the arrival of twelve slaves, who presently covered the table with the most exquisite fruits. Canzada made me sit down by her: we began to eat, and she helped me to the most excellent. The variety and delicacy of the wines answered to that of the provisions: they sparkled in cups of crystal, but animated me much less than the looks of the lady, who, presenting a cup to me with a smiling air, kindled a flame in my heart, which increased every moment. 
 During the repast, her conversation was very lively; the pleasantry of her humour added new graces to it. Every time that she offered me wine, her beautiful lips tasting first, rendered it still more delicious; I took the cup with transport, and as I drank the liquor, swallowed the sweet poison of love. 
 At the end of the repast, Canzada's women divided themselves into two companies; some singing, others dancing. While they were chanting their soft airs, the eyes of Canzada and mine spoke in dumb language the most tender and delicate sentiments. 
 Night coming on, I would have taken leave of the lady: how, said she to me, with an air of dissatisfaction, do you think of leaving me? After the
 
assurances you have given me of having no other will than mine, could I expect so ill a compliment? For a man in love, your impatience seems very surprising. Ah madam! cried I, how ill you interpret the sentiments of my heart! This reception, of which I appear not to know the value, raises the softest ideas in my soul. I fear to abuse your favours, and you should rather pity me for the conflict I feel in offering to quit you. You deserve little pity, replied she, for a conflict you might have avoided; such an over-discretion is to be suspected; I would not advise you to think it meritorious. How, madam, said I, could I flatter myself that you had destined me to pass the night in your palace? 
 In the midst of all the satisfaction her goodness had procured me, I could not deny but that I was uneasy. I related to her the reception that my host had given me at my arrival at Serendib, representing to her that he was most certainly in great uneasiness concerning me. 
 Canzada agreed that I ought to send to Habib, but she would not permit me to go myself: she only gave me leave to write to him, but at the same time forbade me to give him the least hint of my adventure. Her distrust was so great, that she dictated the letter; and I could only acquaint him, that some important business had retarded my departure, and deprived me of the happiness of seeing him for some days, and that I desired he would be under no apprehensions on my account. 
 Pleased that I had put off my departure, she led me into the several apartments of her palace, and shewed me a magnificence that seemed worthy of a prime visier. When the hour of rest came on, she conducted me to an apartment prepared for me. She left me, and was no sooner gone, but slaves, who were commanded to attend me, brought every thing that was proper for the occasion, and put me to bed. 
 When I found myself alone, and at liberty to reflect seriously on this adventure, I said to myself, What will all this come to? How richly this palace is furnished! Can I ever hope to be possessed of the lady? No, Aboulfaouaris, no; this was never designed for thee; cease to flatter thyself: these are snares which fortune hath laid, and thou wilt presently find them vanishing like a dream, and deceiving thee in those ideas of greatness and pleasure, which thou imaginest are reserved for thee. 
 This thought failed not to disturb me. In a minute after, I fancied it was wrong to alarm myself; that Canzada could have no interest to deceive me, and therefore that I ought not to suspect her kindness: that the behaviour of her people had appeared to me very sincere and natural; and that I had observed, by her eyes, she was touched with a real passion for me: so that sometimes reposing an entire confidence in her, and sometimes giving way to my fears, like a vessel agitated by two contrary winds, I passed the whole night without a moment of rest. 
 Break of day surprised me, while I was yet reflecting with great concern on what had employed me in the night: the sun shone into my apartment, and made the rich furniture glitter: dazled by the brightness, I looked upon the palace as one of those enchanted castles, where magic art, getting the conquest of nature, boasts the vast extent of its power. I got up, and presently the slaves hearing me walk, came into the room with magnificent robes; I took one of green silk, embroidered with gold, the work and design of which pleased me infinitely. 
 I was no sooner dressed, than Canzada came to ask me if I had rested well; her impatience of seeing me again would not suffer her to wait till I could go to find her in her own apartment. I answered, that I had passed the night in a manner that ought to hasten the moment of my happiness. She replied, smiling, that she would be more fully informed of my sincerity, before she made a further progress of such consequence to her quiet. 
 I remained eight days in Canzada's palace, and was treated with the respect due to a king. The lady shewed a particular regard for me; she refused me no signs of tenderness and complaisance that I could desire of her, compatible with virtue. 
 One day, when we were walking in the garden, Aboulfaouaris, said she, I flatter myself that you love me; in this confidence, I am at last resolved to compleat your wishes; to give you, with my
 
person, the free disposal of my wealth.  After this, can you refuse me any thing? Ah madam! said I, interrupting her, with all the marks of real gratitude, this doubt is injurious to my passion. Speak! were it my life, it would be glory enough to sacrifice it to the least of your desires. That which I shall ask, replied the lady, will be a favour bestowed on you, if you love me, as I would fain believe. Explain yourself then, cried I, it is too much to be kept in suspence. The favour I have to ask you, said she, is to secure my repose and happiness. Promise! swear to me an eternal constancy! and to prevent the chagrin of seeing ourselves separated, join the gift of your hand to that of your heart. Let us be linked together by the sacred tie of marriage. 
 Though the beginning of Canzada's discourse had filled me with joy, her last words produced a quite contrary effect. Though she had behaved with the strictest decorum, yet I never imagined she thought of marriage, for she was of the sect of the Guebres, who are the ancient Persians that adore the fire, and I a Mahometan; so that she raised in me an extraordinary astonishment. I was disturbed, I grew pale, I reddened, I cast down my eyes; confusion and perplexity took possession of those cheeks, on which joy was revelling but the moment before. 
 The lady, who observed me with attention, easily penetrated the cause of my disorder. I could not have believed, said she, with a fierce and disdainful
 
air, that such a proposal would have been so disagreeable to you; I rather expected transports of joy from you, than this confusion. What, is it a dishonour to have me for your wife? Madam, answered I, I know the value of that glorious degree, to which your bounty would raise me, but Heaven hath placed an invincible obstruction in the way; and if you see trouble and confusion cover my face, it is because I mourn in secret my misfortune, which will not permit me to accept of an offer, which otherwise would crown my glory and happiness. 
 I imagined, replied she, that my rank was the sole obstacle to your good fortune. When I debased myself to you, I thought I had removed all difficulties: but tell me, pursued she, what is that obstacle that you take to be so invincible. My religion, replied I. How can I break through the command, which prohibits us to marry a wife, who is no follower of Mahomet. I am not less scrupulous in my religion than you, replied Canzada, and would not for an empire marry with a Mahometan. I designed, therefore, to make you renounce the false doctrine of your prophet, and oblige you to embrace the sect of the Guebres. I reckoned upon your worshipping the fire and the sun. In short, that you would abjure your own religion to follow mine. I confess, I promised myself, to have made it a merit in the eyes of the god we adore, to make a convert of the person whom I loved, even to the degree of delivering up to him all my treasure; but
 
you deny me the advantage of such a merit, and, despising the tender I make you of a large fortune, rather than consent to marry me, you become the most ungrateful of all men. 
 These last words, and the tone in which Canzada pronounced them, increased my confusion, and furnished new occasion to stir up her resentment against me. She loaded me with reproaches, and shed tears, which pierced my heart every instant: how formidable was she in this condition to a lover who was willing to preserve his virtue! my own grief, and that which she felt, deprived me almost of my senses. Alas! there wanted but little to conquer me, and I had without doubt sacrificed all to her tears, if, secretly inspired by Mahomet, I had not received from the grand prophet the assistance I wanted: but I remained firm in my resolution, and observed the precept of my religion. 
 Canzada was much astonished that an adherence to my faith was capable of making me renounce the possession of her and her riches. She had heard of some Mussulman less scrupulous than myself, and my firmness grieved her much; nevertheless, cherishing yet hopes that at the end I should yield, she would not take my refusal for a final answer. The injustice and cruelty of your proceedings, said she to me, ought before now to have tired my patience; I blush that I am still so weak as to have the least inclination for you. However, I will yet believe you will change your opinion; I give you
 
eight days still to determine: you shall have no cause to reproach me, that I give you not time to consider: but, if after that, you take not a resolution of doing what I require of you; if you persist to render yourself unworthy of my bounty, expect all the most rigorous resentment an enraged woman can inflict. 
 At these words she left me with an air that might convince me, she would effectually come to the last extremity, if I did not resolve to marry her. I was left in the most deplorable condition imaginable. Nothing was equal to my consternation. I could see no hopes that I could be happy, unless I would abjure Mahometanism. And could I resolve on that? charming Canzada, cried I to myself sighing, I may no longer raise my desires to your enjoyment. But though I have lost the hopes of possessing you, it is not in my power to cease loving you; at what distance soever you are from me, you will be the sovereign of my heart. 
 I passed the eight days that were given me in lamenting the good fortune I had once conceived hopes of; but I had courage enough not to alter my resolution. Canzada perceiving at the end of the time she had prescribed that I was not yet in the proper disposition, granted me eight days more; and, to contribute on her part to the victory she designed to gain, she made use of her most powerful charms. In short, seeing the time elapse again, without having gained any advantage, she sent for
 
me. I was conducted into the most stately apartment of the palace: She waited for me in the midst of her women, upon a throne raised a few steps from the floor, and had more the air of a severe judge, than of a compassionate mistress. 
 I approached trembling, and could scarce make use of my senses. She ordered her women to leave the room. Well, Aboulfaouaris, said she, have your reflections inspired your stubborn heart with sentiments that are worthy of me? I was struck to the very soul, and fainted at the foot of the throne. 
 Canzada descended from the throne, and was busy to help me. I perceived it when I came to myself, and opening my eyes, fixed them on the lady. Cease, madam, said I, with a low voice, cease to concern yourself for a wretch, who is not worthy your care. It is true, said she, interrupting me with some emotion, that I have reason to complain of you; but it is your own fault. Forget your injustice, and accept an advantage you cannot too much cherish. 
 Alas! madam, cried I, in an accent of grief and despair, what can I gain by your love on such cruel conditions as you propose to me? When I am the reward of your compliance, replied the lady, ought you to balance any considerations against so great an acquisition? Would you have me believe, that there is something dearer to you than myself? You are dearer to me than all things, replied I; but can
 
I be worthy of you, if I have the weakness and cowardice to fully my honour by renouncing my religion . Peace, peace, perfidious man, cried she, interrupting me with the utmost passion: Make use no more of your false reasons to justify pretences that would not disquiet you, had you really loved me. But go, thou art unworthy of my favours. I am at length resolved; and leave thee to thy own ingratitude. 
 At these words, which much agitated me, she stood silent: Then re-assuming her speech with an air of coldness, which confessed no less rage than the accent in which she spoke: Aboulfaouaris, pursued she, never let me see you more; wait my orders; you shall soon be acquainted with what I determine concerning your fate. In speaking thus, she left the apartment with an emotion equal to mine; but we were moved with quite different passions. 
 I then knew what I had to apprehend from the disposition in which I found things. If at times I was so passionate a lover, as to think with pleasure of dying by the hands of the object beloved; at others, the love for life made me think of means to escape. But how should I obtain my end? I was kept always in sight, and the lady's orders were all exactly performed. Nor could I ever find means to inform my host of the place where I was. 
 Every day I expected to hear what sentence she had passed upon me, and three weeks elapsed without hearing any thing. The incertainty in which I
 
lived, had something in it more terrible than any sentence they could pronounce. I desired to have an end put to this suspence, let what would be the consequence. 
 In short, the moment I wished for came. As I was rising to dress myself one morning, after having spent a night more troublesome than usual, five or six of Canzada's slaves entered my chamber. They conducted a number of people, habited otherwise than those of Serendib; he who appeared to be the chief of these strangers, looked upon me some time with attention; and at last gravely broke silence, and bid me follow him. He said this with an air, which made me conclude that I must obey him. 
 We crossed the palace, and when we were got to the gate, I asked one of my conductors, whither they pretended to carry me. That you will know in time, answered he; but we are expresly forbid to tell you. These men conducted me to the port; I embarked with them; they presently got ready; and we set sail. 
 When we were out at sea, the master of the ship informed me, that he was of the kingdom of Golconda, that Canzada had given me to him for a slave, and that he was charged particularly never to grant me liberty to return to Basra; he said no more, nor asked me any question about that lady. This gave me room to judge, that since she had hid from him her affections for me, and the affront of my refusing her, she had engaged him to promise,
 
that he would not inform himself of the reasons she had to rid her hands of me. 
 Such was the revenge of Canzada; whom I cannot accuse of rigour. She punished me too mildly for the crime that I had been guilty of. When I reflected, however, that I should return no more to my father, or my country, my slavery became insupportable. I afflicted myself much at first; but making a virtue of necessity, I studied to serve my master faithfully, who was a very good man, and did not want sense. I was not satisfied merely to do what he ordered me, I endeavoured to prevent his desires, and found from time to time he was more and more pleased with me. 
 
 
 
 
 MRS. EGERTON. 
 I think, Mr. Egerton, this lady, though a virtuous one, was far from being sufficiently circumspect in her behaviour. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 It is very true, my love; but we must make an allowance for eastern manners: Had she acted so imprudently in England, her virtue would not only have been sullied, but her reputation would have been lost, however innocent she might in reality have been. 
 
 
 MISS FORRESTER. 
 I think too, Sir, considering how violently she was in love, she acted rather cruelly, to send her lover into slavery. 
 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Perhaps so, but in this again we must make an allowance for customs and countries. Her lover, you hear, thought his punishment a mild one. 
 
 
 CHARLES EGERTON. 
 But I thought, Sir, you taught us to expect something of the marvellous. I think this is tolerably probable for an eastern tale. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Have patience, and proceed. 
 
 
 
 
 The ADVENTURES of ABOULFAOUARIS. PART II. 
 WE sailed round the Island of Ceylon to come northward into the Gulph of Bengal, and were just ready to enter the Gulph, when the most violent storm arose that was ever seen in those seas. We wanted a full south wind to carry us to the northward; but a north west wind drove us directly south-east, quite contrary to our intended course for Golconda. We were driven we knew not whither; the storm wearied the art of the mariners; who seeing themselves in danger, quitted their labour, and left the vessel to the pleasure of the winds and waves. 
 This wind lasted fifteen days, with such impetuosity, that it carried us six hundred leagues out of
 
our course. It changed at last, and filled us with joy; but we were disturbed by an adventure so very extraordinary as scarcely to appear credible. 
 We were on the point of the Isle of Java, on the east side, when we perceived near us a man struggling against the waves, to keep himself from sinking. He kept fast hold of a plank, that supported him, and made signs to us to come and help him. Compassion is commendable, but sometimes very dangerous; as you will understand by the sequel. 
 We hoisted out our boat, and brought him aboard. He appeared to be about forty years old; of a monstrous shape; his head large, his hair short and thick, his mouth excessively wide; his teeth appeared long, and very sharp: his arms nervous, his hands large, and on each finger a long crooked nail. His eyes, which I had done wrong to omit, resembled those of a tiger, and he had a flat nose, with very open nostrils. His whole physiognomy was shocking, and he had a sullen air, capable of changing into terror that compassion with which he at first inspired us. 
 When he was brought to Dehaousch the master, he said, Sir, I owe my life to you; I was upon the point of perishing without your assistance. It is true, replied the master, you had been presently drowned, if you had not had the good fortune to meet us. It is not the sea which I feared, answers the man, smiling; I could live whole years in the water without hurt. That which torments me most
 
is a devouring hunger, that gnaws me; for it is almost twelve hours since I have eat. Do me the favour to bring me something to repair my lost strength after so long a fast never mind after what manner I am far from nice. I eat every thing. 
 We looked upon one another, and judged that the danger he had been in had undoubtedly disturbed his senses, which was also the master's opinion, who, conceiving that he had full occasion to eat, ordered as much as would serve six persons; with cloaths to cover him. As for cloaths, said the stranger, I need none, I go always naked. But decency, replied Dehaousch, will not let you stay with us in the condition you are in. Ho! replied the other rudely, you will soon accustom yourselves to the sight. 
 This brutal answer confirmed us in the opinion, that he was not in his senses. His hunger pressed, and he was impatient to eat. He fell to kicking the hatches, grumbled, and rolled his eyes dreadfully. At length he saw what he wanted, fell upon it with a greediness that surprised us; and in a moment dispatched it. 
 When he had eaten up all the provision that had been brought him, with an air of authority he bid us bring more. The master of the vessel, willing to see the event, ordered that he should be obeyed, but this second service was soon swallowed; and he demanded more to eat, when one of the slaves of
 
the ship, provoked with the insolence of the brute, was going to treat him as he deserved; but the savage laid his two hands on his shoulders, and tore him to pieces with his sharp nails. In a moment no less than fifty sabres were lifted up against him, to revenge this horrid murder. Each man struck at him with all the resolution and boldness he was able; but we perceived, with dread, that our enemy had a skin as impenetrable as a diamond: our sabres broke or turned their edges, without being able to make an impression. One man that was the most eager against him he laid hold on, with an astonishing force, and tore him to pieces before our eyes. 
 When we found our sabres useless, and that we could not wound him, we fell all together upon him to throw him into the sea; but he was immoveable: for, besides prodigious strength, he struck his crooked nails into the wood of the hatches, and kept his hold, like a rock in the midst of the waves. Far from being dismayed at our attempt, he told us, with a sour smile, my friends, you have undertaken an ill business; I have reduced those who were as untractable as yourselves. If you continue to oppose my will, I shall use you all I have done your two comrades. 
 Chilled with fear we made no further resistance. A third time we fetched him something to eat, he sat down to table, and as soon as he observed that we were at last determined to submit, he became good humoured. He now seemed sorry that we had
 
forced him to what he had done; and told us very calmly, that he esteemed us for the service we had done him, in taking him out of the sea, where he must have died of hunger in a few hours: that he wished there would come some other vessel well stored with provisions, because he would then throw himself aboard her, and trouble us no farther. He laughed and jested like a common man, and we should have found him very diverting, if circumstances would have permitted us to relish his pleasantry. 
 In short, he made a fourth meal, and then abstained two hours from eating. During this interval, he asked us, one after another, about our country, customs, and adventures. We hoped that the fumes of indigestion would rise to his brain, and waited with impatience till sleep should overpower his senses, that we might throw him suddenly into the sea. This hope was our only resource; for though we had had ever so much provision in our ship, at his way of eating, he would have devoured it in a little time. But, alas! we flattered ourselves with vain hopes. This wretch, as if he had penetrated our designs, informed us he never slept. The quantity that I eat, says he, restores the weakness of nature, and serves instead of rest. 
 We understood with grief this sad truth. We deplored our ill fortune, and the master despaired of ever returning to Golconda, when on a sudden the air appeared darkened, a tempest seemed gathering, and we were the more glad of it, because a storm
 
would afford us hopes of saving ourselves. Our vessel might dash against a rock as we came in sight of some island, where we might by swimming, perhaps, get rid of the monster; who undoubtedly had promised himself, after he had eaten up all our provisions, to devour the crew. 
 We wished therefore for a violent tempest, and even prayed to heaven that we might sink. But we were deceived; for what we took for a gathering of clouds and vapours, was only one of the largest rokhs that was ever seen in those seas. This monstrous bird came souse down impetuously upon the deck, and snatched off our enemy from the midst of the ship's crew, who had no time to arm himself against such a surprize. We were not aware ourselves of it till some moments after, when the bird was mounted in the air with his prey. 
 We then saw an extraordinary combat; the man finding himself suspended in the air by the talons of a winged monster, which he felt the strength of, began now to defend himself. He had his hands at liberty; he struck his hooked nails into the body of the rokh, and, at the same time, setting his teeth upon his breast, he fell to devouring the flesh and feathers, when the bird made such a hideous cry, as rent the air around; and to revenge itself, struck out both the eyes of its enemy with one of its talons. Though blinded he quitted not his hold, but the rokh collecting together the remainder of strength in death, pierced his head with one stroke
 
of the beak; so that both fell down dead into the sea. 
 Thus we find that it was written upon the table of predestination, that we should be delivered from this dangerous monster. As soon as we saw ourselves rid of him, we could not enough admire our good fortune, and were sorry for the death of the rokh who had delivered us. We continued our voyage, and entertained ourselves with this adventure. Having now a constant favourable wind, after several days sail, we discovered land. On the first notice of it we took the altitudes, and found that we were on the west point of the Isle of Java, which, with the east of the Isle of Sumatra, forms the entrance into the Streights of Sonde, not far from the City of Bantam. Overjoyed at this discovery, we crowded our sails; and in a little time arrived at Bantam. 
 There we took in fresh provisions, and set sail for Batavia. As soon as Dehaousch had finished his affairs there, we sailed towards the kingdom of Golconda, where we arrived in about a month's navigation from the Isles of the Sonde. 
 My patron was received in the capital where he resided with a general applause, for he was beloved by every body. 
 After a thousand and a thousand caresses from his family, he presented me to his wife and daughter, as a slave for whom he had a particular regard, and prayed them to take in good part the services I should
 
render them. In a little time I acquired great reputation with them. The other slaves, far from being jealous, appeared pleased to see me so well treated. It is true that I procured them the best usage I could, and often occasioned them to be better rewarded than they deserved. 
 In short, the friendship that Dehaousch had for me increased so much that he said to me one day; Aboulfaouaris, for I had neither hid from him my name nor my country, you cannot but have taken notice that I have ever distinguished you from the rest of my slaves. At the first instant that I saw you, I took a fancy to you, and I have spared nothing to soften the rigour of your slavery: I design to give you yet greater marks of my affection. You have seen my daughter; there is not, perhaps, a more beautiful girl in Golconda. You shall marry her; I have sounded her upon this subject, and find you are not displeasing to her. 
 I was so stunned at this proposition, that it was not difficult for him to judge the news was not very agreeable to me. How! said he, does what I propose disturb you? Is the advantage of being my heir, with the enjoyment of Facrinnissa, so very inconsiderable, that it cannot raise the ambition of a slave? Sir, answered I, the honour of being your son-in-law would be sufficient to tempt me, were you a Mussulman as I am; but you are a Heathen. If you have no other obstacle but that, replied my master, we shall soon agree; for I am resolved to
 
turn Mahometan, and my daughter is in the same resolution: In spite of the prejudices with which our Gentile priests have filled my mind, I am weary of paying divine honours to oxen and cows: I have too much reason not to acknowledge it to be a wretched superstition, and I think there is a supreme Being above all other deities; therefore, my son, accept my proposal, without scruple or delay. 
 Though Facrinnissa was lovely, and the proffer advantageous; and though, on the score of my religion, I had nothing to reproach myself with in marrying my master's daughter, I had still a reluctance to this marriage, which could be no more than the effect of my remembrance of Canzada. However, I was so far master of myself, as to say nothing of it to my patron, who, believing that I consented, as I made no opposition to it, went to carry the news to his wife and daughter. 
 I had presently a conversation with Facrinnissa, who appeared so gay and contented, that I could not help thinking that my person pleased her. Aboulfaouaris, said she, my father hath made choice of you for my husband, and I doubt not of your generosity towards the promoting of my good fortune, though at the loss of your own. You are not deceived in me, fair lady, answered I, there is nothing that I will not do for the charming Facrinnissa. Hear me, replied she, and you shall understand the service I require of you. I love the son of a merchant of Golconda, and I am passionately beloved
 
by him: he hath asked me of my father several times, who always refused him, because of an ancient grudge which is kept up betwixt our families. I would have you marry me, and, the day after our marriage divorce me, as through anger; afterwards feign as if you would take me again, and then chuse my lover for your hulla. I understand you, said I, you only desire that I should marry you to deliver you up to him whom you love: very well, madam, I agree to do so: how difficult soever it will be to yield up the possession of such an object, I think myself capable of so great a self-denial. But what will my master say? You are not ignorant of the obligations I have to him. Surprised at my conduct, he will not fail to reproach me. What shall I answer? Let not this give you any uneasiness, replied she, follow exactly the advice I shall give you, and I promise you my father will not complain of you. 
 Upon the faith of this promise, I assured her that I was disposed to promote her love after the manner that she desired. Charmed with this assurance, she pressed her father to hasten the marriage, which was celebrated in a few days she abjured her religion beforehand, and embraced Mahometanism. All I obtained from my union with Facrinnissa, was obliging the lady to renounce her idolatry sooner than she would otherwise have done. Lovely as she was, I sacrificed the rights of a husband to the honour of keeping the promise I had given; and looked upon her only as a pledge entrusted with me, which
 
I was obliged honourably to restore. I was not long charged with it. A few days after our marriage I divorced her. My master, as I had foreseen, astonished at my proceeding, came to my house: for you must know, that the very day we were married, we lived in a house by ourselves. He asked me for what reason I had divorced Facrinnissa? I answered him, that I found she had a passion for another, and that not being willing to possess a woman against her inclinations, I had repudiated her. He laughed at my niceness, and told me that his daughter would by degrees love me better. In short, he exhorted me to take her again, and I pretended I would. I will go into the city, said I to him, find out a hulla, and bring him this night before the cady: to-morrow we will renew our nuptials, in hopes of better success. 
 My patron returned home something better satisfied; he left to me the care of chusing a hulla, and the rest of the ceremony. I went and found out Facrinnissa's lover, and they were married before me by the cady's lieutenant. They passed the night together. The next day the hulla refusing to divorce his wife, I went to my master's house, and dissembling a grief I never felt, told him that the hulla, contrary to what he had promised me the day before, refused to divorce the lady. 
 We ought to know who this hulla is, said Dehaousch; if he is poor, I have reputation and money enough to take my daughter from him. During
 
the time he was speaking, the nayb or cady's deputy came in, and said; "Sir, I come to inform you that the hulla, whom your son-in-law hath chosen, is the son of Amer, the merchant; therefore your daughter is lost as to her first husband, for the second is resolved never to part with her. I know very well that Amer is not your friend, but I would advise you to be reconciled to him in favour of this marriage, and forget the hatred you have so long borne towards him." 
 The nayb, not contented to exhort my patron to an accommodation with the family of his new son-in-law, offered to speak himself to Amer, and spare nothing to make them friends. Dehaousch reasoned properly in this affair, and therefore was not hard to be reconciled; and the lieutenant finding Amer in the same disposition, established between the two fathers a perfect understanding. But the best of all was, my patron, prepossessed that I was the victim of this reconciliation, pitied me, and, by way of recompense, gave me a large sum of money, with liberty to return to Basra. 
 Thus was Facrinnissa freed from a husband for whom she had no affection, and married to her lover. As soon as I saw their good fortune secured, I went from Golconda, and joining myself to some people who were going to Surat, got to the seaside, embarked in a vessel that presently set sail, and we had a happy voyage. The next day, finding no shipping ready to go for Basra, I was obliged to stay at Surat. 
 The city of Surat is too agreeable, and too full of curiosities, for one to be weary of it in a short time. I went sometimes to the public baths, which are very fine, and where there is better attendance than in any other place in the world. I walked about the city and avenues, and in the many delightful gardens that are open to all sorts of people. 
 One day a man somewhat advanced in years met me at the turn of an alley, saluted me very civilly, and we joined conversation. He appeared frank and sincere, told me that he was a Gentile, and that he had in the road of Surat a vessel belonging to him, in which every year he made a voyage. To be equally free with him, I told him that I was a Mahometan, and related to him my adventures. 
 He seemed so sensible of my misfortunes, as to surprise me. I observe my son, said he, that you are astonished to see me take part in your afflictions: but, besides that I am naturally compassionate, I must tell you that I have a great friendship for you, though you are not of my religion. I am concerned at the dangers you have run through; and should you tell them to your own father, he could not feel himself more sensible of them than I am. O young man! cried he, how fortunate that I came to walk in these gardens! your conversation is agreeable to me, and every moment increases the affection I have conceived for you; let us go into the city and lodge together; I am old and rich; have no child; and will make you my heir. At
 
these words, he took me in his arms, and embraced me with the tenderness of a father. 
 I thanked him for these offers of kindness, on his part, and made him lively protestations of gratitude on mine. In short, the result was, that he conducted me to his house, which was one of the finest in Surat. When the porter opened the gate, I perceived, instead of a court, two parterres, with a profusion of flowers, divided by a large walk made of a composition as hard and beautiful as marble. The walk led us to a fine building, where the furniture, though not rich, was elegant; the hangings and the sofas were of painted linen, the figures admirably wrought, and the linen exquisitely fine. 
 The old man invited me to bathe with him in a large bason of transparent water, which served to refresh him, as well as to fulfil the duties of his religion. The slaves attended us with the finest linen: we afterwards sat down to a table, covered with provisions, served up in china; and drank of a palm wine called Taray, extremely delicious. 
 At the end of our repast, my host said, I will trust you with a secret that shall convince you of my great kindness for you. I am in five days time to go from the port of Surat to an island which I visit every year, and you shall go along with me. In that island, which is uninhabitable, for it is full of tigers, there are two hundred pits that produce pearls of an extraordinary size. This is only known to myself. The captain of a vessel, to whom I was once a
 
favourite slave, discovered this treasure to me, and informed me how I should approach these pits in spite of the wild beasts. 
 Certainly, said I, the captain did well in teaching you this secret, for the tigers are likely to give but an ill reception to strangers. It is easy, replied he, to drive away the most furious. We must go ashore in the night with lighted torches; the sight of fire frights them, and will make them fly from us. We will go then, and take from those precious sources a large quantity of pearl, and sell it at our return into this city: the money we shall get, added to what I have already hoarded, will make a considerable fortune for you after my death. 
 To convince me of the truth of what he said, he took me into his closet, and shewed roupees of gold and silver, lying in prodigious quantities. Well, said he, does this appear worth your attention? Have you any dislike to the voyage? I answered, I had not; but begged leave to write to my father of my arrival at Surat, and the reasons which detained me. My host consented, and undertook that it should be delivered to my father. 
 I trusted my letter to the care of Hyzoum, which was the Gentile's name, and we embarked at the port of Surat: we set sail, and after having been three weeks at sea, without any accident, we saw the little desart island, which my friend told me was that where our business lay; we moored there, and waited for night that we might land. Hyzoum ordered his
 
sailors to remain aboard, and advanced into the isle with no body but myself. We had each of us a lighted torch, with a number of them under our arms, and bags to put the pearl in. We looked for the pits, by the light of our torches, and we had not searched long before we discovered one of the deepest. Descend, my son, said he; I doubt not but here are fine pearls. I descended by a rope, which he held, and felt pearl under my feet. I filled the bag; the old man pulled it up, opened the shells, but could find nothing in them but pearl seed; he returned the bag again, and said, The pearls of this pit are not yet in a condition to be taken. Cover them with earth, which will make them grow, and next year we will come and take them. 
 He drew me up by the rope, and we went to another pit, in a large mountain that rose in the midst of the island. The shells here were singularly beautiful. I filled the bag several times, which the old man drew up, and emptied. Then turning to me, laughing, said, "Farewel, young man, I thank you for the good services you have done me." O father, answered I, take me from hence Thou art very well where thou art, replied the traitor; lie down upon the pearls, and take thy rest. I bring hither every year a young Mussulman like thee. Thou hast nothing to do but to pray to thy prophet. If he be able to work miracles, as thou imaginest, he will not forsake a man so zealous, and so strict to his religion. He spoke these words, and left me miserable. 
 O wretched Aboulfaouaris, said I to myself, to what misfortunes hath Heaven condemned thee? What hast thou done to deserve this cruel fate? But why do I complain of a misfortune I have brought upon myself? Ought not I to have distrusted a perfidious idolater? His excessive fondness! ought I not to have suspected it? But O unprofitable regret! What avails it now to blame myself for a fault which I am going too dearly to pay for, and which it depended not on me to avoid? Alas! it was my fate to fall into this abyss, and the same power which brought me in, can take me out again. 
 This reflexion suffered me not to give way to despair. I passed the night in running about the bottom of the pit, which seemed of vast extent. I found myself treading upon bones, and I guessed that others had perished miserably in this precipice. The thought, however, did not discourage me. Supported by our great prophet, who undoubtedly inspired me, I advanced boldly to an aperture, whence issued a frightful noise. I stopt to hearken, and, listening with an attentive ear, thought I understood the cause of the noise. I was not deceived in my conjecture: it was the fall of several waters from the sea, which penetrating into the mountain by divers clefts, met together in this place. I concluded from thence that they communicated with the sea by some large stream, by which I might pass. I threw myself in, and, almost suffocated, the waters took away my senses, dragged me along with them,
 
and cast me on the sea-coast by a crevice that was in the mountain. 
 When I regained my senses, and perceived the place through which the waters had brought me out to day-light, I prostrated myself on the shore, to thank Heaven for my deliverance, and addressed Mahomet in these terms: "O Prophet of the Faithful, Favourite of the Most High, I have more need than ever of thy assistance. To what purpose hast thou delivered me from the deep abyss into which I was cast, if I am to be left a prey to the wild beasts of this island, or if hunger must put an end to my life?" 
 Full of faith, after this prayer, I arose and walked about the island, but saw nothing of Hyzoum's ship; that traitor had soon set sail. Though I was not without fear that the tigers would devour me, I yet saw none; but soon perceived a large vessel passing near the island, and unfolded the linen of my turban to make a signal for them to come to me. Those on the deck observed me, sent out a boat, and I was taken aboard. 
 Judge of my joy, when I found in the captain of the ship an intimate friend of my father's, and saw by the dress of the crew that they were all inhabitants of Basra. I related to them the adventure that brought me to the island, and they heard me attention. They uttered a thousand imprecations against the old man, and I asked the captain after my father, and about matters that related to my family.
 
After this our discourse fell again on the traitor Hyzoum, when the ship's company were desirous of making a descent upon the island to search the pits. We were too many to fear the tigers, we had no need of lighted torches; and if my perfidious old fellow took that precaution, it was because he would have no body partake with him in the pearls. We then cast anchor, and went ashore, without waiting for the night. Armed with darts and sabres, to defend ourselves from the wild beasts, we descended by turns into the pits, where we found pearls in abundance. Innumerable was the quantity of shells we took up. It employed three days compleat to open them, and to divide the pearls; and there fell so much to every one's share, that all were satisfied. 
 
 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Well, friend Charles, what is your opinion of the marvellous by this time? 
 
 
 CHARLES EGERTON. 
 Oh dear, sir, I think it a charming pretty story. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 I knew you would. I remember how much I, at your age, delighted in reading Gulliver's Travels, without in the least suspecting the real intention of the author. The passion of surprise has a very powerful and pleasing effect upon all minds: the only difference seems to be, that it is much more difficult
 
to raise when experience has prescribed bounds to the imagination. 
 
 
 NANCY. 
 But pray, sir, what is the meaning of a hulla? 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Why, my dear, among the eastern nations there is a perfect freedom of divorce, on condition that the husband returns the wife to her family, with her portion entire: and as people there, as well as here, sometimes fall out, and are afterwards sorry for it, hasty divorces occasionally take place: but in order to prevent the abuse that might arise from the caprices of whim or passion, the laws will not permit a man to take a woman again whom he has repudiated, unless she is first married, and then divorced by another. When, therefore, a husband repents of his rashness, in putting away his wife, he prevails on a friend, or hires a needy person, to marry the woman, and divorce her the next day, which person is called a hulla. Let us return to our traveller. 
 
 
 
 
 The ADVENTURES of ABOULFAOUARIS. PART III. 
 We now set sail for Serendib to sell our painted callicoes of Surat, and buy cinnamon. We were sailing merrily, when all of a sudden a furious tempest arose, which drove us out of our course, we
 
knew not whither, for six days together. On the seventh the sky was clear, but neither pilot nor captain could tell where we were. We knew not what to think, or what to do; and, in spite of all our endeavours, the vessel was drawn by violence towards a mountain, which we discovered on the eighth day. 
 This mountain was of great extent, and prodigious height; very steep, and, what strangely surprised us, bright and shining like polished steel. An old sailor, with a profound sigh, cried out, "We are lost! I have formerly heard talk of this place. It is fatal to all ships that come near it; so that if once you arrive at the foot of the mountain, you are detained there as by a charm; and are never more able to stand out to sea, or to get away from it." 
 At this relation of the old mariner, the whole crew were immoderately afflicted. Alas! says one, what are we the better for having found the pearls, if we must lose them and our lives too? Why, says another, could none among us know the danger we were in? A third made the air echo with his complaints and lamentations; and a fourth, falling upon his knees; implored the Prophet's assistance. With respect to myself, touched more with the affliction with which they were all seized, than at the dangers that threatened us, I said to the captain, "Why should we, sir, thus cowardly submit to sorrow? rather let us seek some means to extricate ourselves out of this difficulty. As for me, I have naturally courage. Whether
 
Mahomet may have this moment inspired me or not, I am no ways dismayed at the condition to which we are reduced. As soon as we arrive at the foot of the mountain, let us endeavour to gain the top of it. Mounting together, we may perhaps find a recompence for our misfortunes. 
 The captain, who was not the least fearful among us, answered, that he would, in complaisance, do what was proposed; but that he had no hopes that we should save ourselves. Mean while our vessel arrived at the foot of the mountain: the captain and I threw ourselves into the boat; we gained the land, began to climb the hill, and, not without difficulty, got to the top. 
 Here, with surprise, we saw a green dome, large and high: upon it a column of steel; towards the bottom of which was hung in chains of gold, a small drum made of aloe-wood, and a crooked stick. Above the drum hung a square piece of ebony, upon which were these words, written in letters of gold: "If any ship is so unfortunate as to be drawn to this mountain, she can never put to sea again, except after the following manner. One man of the ship's company must give three strokes with the crooked stick upon the drum. At the first stroke, the ship will get a bow-shot distance from the mountain: at the second, she will be out of sight; and at the third, will be found in the very route she should be in; but the man who strikes the drum, must voluntarily remain behind, and consent to let the rest be gone." 
 When we had read this inscription, which appeared to us a talisman, we returned aboard to inform the crew of our discovery. Every one was ravished to know that there was a way for deliverance; but no body would be the victim. The meanest sailor refused to sacrifice himself for the rest. Well then, said I, I will remain here; I am willing to be an offering for you all, provided you will promise me, that when you get from hence you will go to Basra; that you will tell my father the news, and faithfully deliver into his hands all the pearls which have fallen to my lot. 
 At this discourse, they solemnly beseeched Heaven to shipwreck them, if they punctually performed not what I desired of them. The captain assured me, as well as the rest, that if I had the resolution to stay behind, they would return to Basra without going to Ceylon. He expressed also some concern at losing me; but I could easily perceive he was glad to get out of danger. In short, I embraced the crew, and bade them all a long farewel. They set me ashore, and I ascended alone to the top of the mountain. Advancing towards the dome, I took the crooked stick in my hand, struck the drum, and our vessel departed from the mountain. I struck again, and at the second stroke I lost sight of her. I struck the third time; and then remained under the dome ready to consummate my sacrifice, and undergo the fate reserved for me. 
 I failed not again to address myself to the Prophet, and, secure in his protection, advanced boldly
 
into the mountain, which was above two leagues in extent. After an hour's travel, I perceived a decrepit old man. He had a bald head, a long white beard, and hollow eyes. He seemed to be drawing his last breath, was sitting upon a stone at the door of a little house, and had a short stick in his hand. I saluted him respectfully, and asked him to tell me, why the vessels which passed at a certain distance from the mountain were drawn to it in spite of themselves; and who the author of the talisman was, by virtue of which they were carried to sea again. 
 The old man raised himself up, and returned my salute, leaning upon his staff, while his head shook with weakness. He told me, that the ships were drawn towards the mountain by the force of the currents: that, as to the talisman, which consisted in the drum, he knew not who made it; but if I were curious to know the mystery, I must continue my road, and that I should meet his brother, who was much older than he, and who could give me some light into the matter. I presently took leave of him, and found indeed a second old man, but he appeared to be more vigorous; for he had only begun to grow grey, and one would have thought him rather the son than the senior brother of the other. I asked him, as I had done the first, if he knew who it was that had made the talisman. No, replied he, I know not who it was; if any one can tell you, it is undoubtedly my elder brother, whom you will find on the road a little further. 
 I continued to march on, and presently perceived a man digging. He had not a grey hair on his head, and appeared much too strong to be older than the other two I had seen before. Father, said I, I have met with two old men who have bantered me. I desired them to tell me who was the author of the talisman on the mountain. They said they knew not, but that they had an elder brother who could inform me. The old man smiled at these words, and answered, my son, they told you the truth, they are both younger than I am. 
 If this answer of the third old man surprised me, that which he added still increased my wonder. They call us, said he, the three old men of the mountain: the first that you met is much the youngest; he is not above fifty years old. The reason of his being so worn out and decrepit is, because he had a bad wife and children, who gave him a great deal of uneasiness. The second is seventy-five, and he is ruddier and stronger than the other, because he had a good wife, and no children: as for me, I am more vigorous than my brothers, though I am past a hundred, because I would never marry. 
 As to the talisman, pursued he, the author of which you desire to know, I have heard it said in my youth, that it was composed by a great Indian cabalist, and that is all that I know of it. I asked him afterwards, if I was near any country inhabited. Yes, answered he, you need but follow the road
 
which you are in, and you will presently come to a vast plain, which bounds another mountain, at the foot of which there are two paths, one on the right, and the other on the left hand. Follow the former; it will lead you to a great city, which hath a very fine port. Take care not to follow the left hand path, for that will carry you into a wood, where dwell very wicked men, the descendants of a monstrous race of giants: they are cannibals, and have women who come to the confines of their territories, and endeavour to entice all passengers by their arts and blandishments to follow them into their country. 
 I thanked the old man for the information he gave me, and was resolved not to neglect his cautions. When I had crossed the plain, I took the road on the right hand, and it brought me, as he said, to a very large city, well peopled. The streets and the houses were beautiful, and the port full of shipping. I guessed there must be a great trade, and I was not deceived. I saw ships that came from the kingdom of Canara and Visapour loaded with pepper; others filled with the spices of Cananor, and some with cinnamon. I saw merchants of all countries. As I was busy in observing the port, a man came up to me. We looked upon and knew one another. It was Habib, my father's correspondent at Serendib. After we had embraced several times, Who would have thought, cried he, that I should have met Aboulfaouaris here? What fatal adventure forced
 
you to leave Serendib without bidding me farewel, without giving me notice of your departure; and by what unexpected good fortune are you restored to me? 
 I told him my adventure with Canzada, and what had happened to me since. On his side, he informed me, that he had a ship in the port; that he was come to sell cinnamon, that he had disposed of his cargo, and that in twenty-four hours he hoped to be gone. I expressed to him the joy I had to find him again. He conducted me on board his ship, and the same day we set sail for Serendib. I was overjoyed to return thither, and you may think that Canzada was the principal cause of the pleasure that I conceived to myself of seeing that city again. We arrived after a short voyage, because we had all along a favourable wind. 
 I was very impatient to learn news of Canzada, whom I could not forbear loving, though I had no great reason to be pleased with the treatment she had given me. I went out one morning from Habib's, with a design to spare no pains to get what intelligence I could of her, when a kind of slave stopped me in the street; Sir, said he to me, do you remember me? No, answered I, but yet your face is not altogether unknown to me; I have a confused idea of having seen you, but cannot say where. I know you well, replied he, you are a Mussulman; you are called Aboulfaouaris; I had the honour to wait on you during your abode with the princess Canzada,
 
to whom I was, and still am, a slave. It was I that by her order went to find out your master Dehaousch, into whose hands you were delivered. I was sorry to be put upon that office, and I beg you would believe I was. 
 My heart leaped with joy at the slave's discourse. My dear friend, said I to him, making him accept of a diamond ring, inform me, I conjure you, in what condition is the princess, who is always dear to me, in spite of her rigours: Is she in the same state in which I left her? No, sir, replied the slave, her affairs are much altered within these two months: the king of Ceylon made her espouse an old lord of the court, who was in love with her. She could not help obeying; she is married. 
 The grief I expressed at this news was so severe, that the slave appeared touched at it. I am sorry, said he, that the marriage of my mistress should give you so much trouble: It is your own fault; why would you not renounce your Prophet? You would then at this time have enjoyed the finest woman in the world, and an immense treasure. Had I been in your place, I would not have taken so much time to consider as you did: the first day, the first hour, the first minute, I would have determined to do whatever Canzada had desired me. From how much affliction might you have exempted both yourself and her! For after your departure she fell sick, and had like to have lost her life. 
 I know not, continued he, whether I should tell her, that you are come to Serendib; I fear it will renew the grief which she so long cherished, and which is not yet dispelled. On the other side, I see you so much afflicted, that I cannot resolve to deprive you of all consolation. I promise you then, that this day my mistress shall know that I have seen you. One of her women shall tell her, that you repent of your past conduct, and that if you could make amends for it, you would not hesitate a moment at renouncing Mahomet's doctrine for her sake. No, no, cried I, take care that you promise nothing that I ought not to do, though it were in my power to obtain the princess at the price. Tell her only that I am in despair for having lost her, and to understand that she is discontented with her condition. 
 The slave swore, that he would exactly perform the commission I charged him with; then left me, and I remained in a state of mind equally mixed with joy and grief. If the change of Canzada's condition afflicted me, I felt some joy when I came to think that she might still perhaps have some affection for me. Flattered with so agreeable an idea, I waited every day for the slave's coming to inquire for me at Habib's, where I had told him I lodged; but my expectation was vain; one entire month passed, and I heard no news of Canzada. 
 I guessed then that the slave had made a wrong judgment of his mistress's sentiments; that the lord she had married was beloved by her; or, in short, that the lady's virtue had triumphed over the inclination she had for me. Full of this last thought, which I had the vanity to think well grounded, I retired to a fine country-house which my father's correspondent had, three quarters of a league from the city of Serendib. 
 I employed my time in walking, or, more properly, in musing as I walked, on the object that inflamed me. One day I was got insensibly a good way from Habib's house, and passing along the river-side, came to a magnificent pagod, which was built on the bank. After having admired the structure, I suddenly gave attention to what seemed very deserving of it. I saw several Gentoo priests, who were erecting a sort of hut with reeds, and other combustible matters. I went and asked what they were doing. One, amongst the rest, answered; certainly you have not been long at Serendib, or you would not ask me this question. Are you such a stranger to the custom of the Gentoos, as not to know that this is the place appointed for funerals? It is here that we burn dead bodies; here that the wives, sacrificing themselves to the manes of their husbands, acquire immortal glory. One of the principal lords of the court of Serendib is dead, his body is to be burnt on the river's side five or six hours hence, and his faithful spouse will be consumed
 
in the very flames which are to reduce him to ashes. 
 Having never seen this ceremony, I resolved to be a witness of it. I could not help deploring the bigotry of these idolaters, whose sacrilegious piety consecrates rage and madness; or, rather, I laid the blame on their priests, of whom I had heard much at Surat. This horrible custom is continued amongst the Gentoos. 
 Near the hour that this detestable execution drew nigh, the fields were filled with people; some on foot, some on horseback, and others on palanquins, and preceded by slaves, carrying standards, or blowing the trumpet. The governor of Serendib was mounted on an elephant, in the midst of ten or twelve persons, sitting under a tent, which was raised on the back of the animal. In two or three hours, there were above thirty thousand persons about the pagod and the hut. Not willing to let any circumstance of this ceremony escape my curiosity, I pierced the croud, and got as near the funeral pile as it was possible. Twenty priests, who had each of them a book, began all to pray while in waiting for the victim. 
 It was almost night when she arrived. She was mounted on a white horse richly caparisoned, crowned with flowers, and followed the corpse of her husband, which six men carried on a stately palanquin. Twelve women, adorned with jewels, bracelets, and great rings of gold and silver, attended her;
 
they had all long hair, with necklaces of pearl, fine pendants in their ears, and crowns of gold, with plates of silver enriched by rubies, which covered one half of the face. Musicians followed the women slaves. Her parents and friends came next singing and dancing, to shew their felicity in having, some for a relation and others for their friend, so generous a woman. 
 With the assistance of two priests she dismounted, and was conducted to the banks of the river, where the body of her husband was brought; she washed it from head to foot; and then delivered it to the priests, who carried it into the hut upon a straw mat covered with sulphur. She rose up, without undressing herself, went near to the pile, walked several times round it, and beheld the preparations that were making for her sacrifice with great intrepidity. She embraced her parents and friends, who presently retired; she was embraced by her women slaves, dissolved in tears; to whom she gave liberty, and distributed the jewels and ornaments with which she was dressed. When she took off the silver plate, which covered half her face, and which, till then, had hindered me from knowing her, guess at my astonishment, when I discovered Canzada. All nature reversed at once, could not have more surprised me. 
 Great God! said I to myself, can I believe my eyes? May I not doubt of what I see? Is it really Canzada who is going to suffer so cruel a death?
 
The grief I was in, would not suffer me to see the sacrifice performed; I left her in the hands of the priest, who having exhorted her to render herself worthy, by her constancy, of the happiness that attended her, they put her into the hut, and presented to her, according to custom, a lighted torch, to set fire to it herself. I flew towards Habib's country-house, in a disposition of mind not to be described. Disturbed, forlorn, I knew not what I did; I turned every moment my eyes towards the place of ceremony, and the flames of the pile which I saw rising in the air, rent my heart asunder. 
 At last I arrived there: he asked the cause of the disorder which appeared in me: I told it him, and my generous friend answered me tear for tear. I am surprised, said he, that Canzada would perish to follow an old lord, whom she did not love. Why, said I, was it then in her power to have survived him? Are not the wives here obliged to burn themselves with the bodies of their husbands? No, replied Habib, they are not constrained to sacrifice themselves: on the contrary, the governor of the city, by the king's order, causes the widows that seek this death to come before him: he interrogates them upon the reasons of so fatal a design, and endeavours to persuade them to desist from it. In short, he grants them leave to die, only when they absolutely demand it of him. 
 Canzada, pursued he, was very willing to die, persuaded, as all women are, who sacrifice themselves,
 
that she should procure to herself, by a glorious and voluntary death, an eternal happiness. Besides, she may have been urged on, by the honours that are paid to those miserable victims after their death; for their memories here are held in veneration; even statues are erected to them among those of the pagods. In a word, they are regarded as deities; and this, no doubt, is what inspires our women who demand death, with that fortitude which makes them look upon the preparation of their sacrifice without changing colour. 
 These reflections of Habib raised others in me. I represented to myself, that if Canzada had loved me as much as I loved her, she would not have been so ready to destroy herself; that she would have made me the proposal, that if I would marry her on conditions which I had rejected, she would not sacrifice hreself; that she ought to have put me to this proof, which undoubtedly, however, would have very much perplexed me. 
 Sir, said I to Habib, whatever reasons I have to forget Canzada, I despair of ever doing it; I cannot stay at Serendib after what has happened, give me leave to return to Basra. My host consented; we returned to Serendib the next morning, and the first thing I did was to inquire for a ship that was to go from thence to any part of India: I was informed that one of Surat, laden with callicoes, was just arrived in the port, and that her cargo would soon be old off. I resolved to make use of this opportunity,
 
and waiting for the day of my departure, I led a very melancholy life with Habib. Whatever care my friend took to overcome my distress, he could not conquer it; he spared nothing to compass his end; not a day passed, in which he did not find out some new diversion, and every meal we ate he accompanied with dancing and concerts. 
 One day as I was sitting thus in misery, a slave came to speak with me in private. He was the same that I met on my arival here, who had made me fair promises, which he had not performed. Sir, said he, I protest it is not my fault that you have not seen me sooner; my mistress forbad me to speak to you again, and I dared not disobey her. She was a princess of heroic virtue, and would have no further to say to you: not content to be faithful to a husband she did not love, she gave herself to the flames, to gain the veneration of the Gentoos: but let us leave her to the enjoyment of a happiness she dearly bought, and come to the business that has brought me hither. I am, at present, a slave to another lady, not less fair than Canzada, and who loves you more: I understand you are upon the point of embarking for Surat; but before your departure, I would advise you to make use of the good fortune that presents itself. 
 I was more surprised than pleased at the slave's discourse. Friend, said I, it is with grief that I find myself reduced to be ungrateful to the favourable sentiments your new mistress hath conceived for me:
 
the image of Canzada is always in my thoughts, and leaves me little relish for new adventures. The lady whom you serve must pardon me, if I refuse her favours. Having never seen her, my indifference can be no offence. 
 It must be confessed, replied the slave, that I am not fortunate in my negotiations; I am certain, however, you would be charmed with her, whatever obligations you may have had to Canzada. You are mistaken, said I, you are used to judge wrong of the emotions of the heart; you imagined that your former mistress loved me still, and desired nothing more than my arrival at Serendib. You are in the right to reproach me thus, said the slave; but upon this occasion, be assured that I am certain of what I advance; give me leave only to come for you this night, and take you to the place appointed. No, said I, no, I cannot prevail with myself to believe you; I know women too well, to put her upon trial. What a vexation would she be in, should she find that I cannot love her. In vain did the slave assure me she would hearken to reason, and not impute to me as a crime my constancy to Canzada. I refused to see her: and persuaded myself I should hear no more either of the slave or the lady; but he found me out again at night, and brought me a letter, which contained the substance of what follows: "The conversation you have had with my slave, gives me pleasure; it increases the impatience I had to see to you; and if
 
you be so really concerned about Canzada as you appear to be, both you and I shall presently be better satisfied with each other." 
 This mysterious language gave me room for much speculation. I could not resist the desire I had of clearing up the matter: I followed the slave, who conducted me to a small house, and led me into a very plain lodging, where he left me, saying, he would acquaint the lady I was there. I did not wait long for her she came but oh! think what confusion I was in, when I beheld the Princess Canzada herself, whom I supposed to be reduced to ashes! 
 Aboulfaouaris's auditors stood amazed: He perceived it, smiled, and continued his relation. 
 I believed it, at first, to be an apparition. The features of a woman, the most dear to me in the world, put me in as great dismay, as a real spectre could have produced; she observed my confusion, and could not forbear laughing. Aboulfaouaris, said she, 'twas not to frighten you that I desired to see you; 'tis not Canzada's shade you see, 'tis she herself: Your surprise indeed has some foundation. We cannot discover on a sudden, a person whom we believed to be dead, without much emotion; but I will dispel your fear, by convincing you that I yet live. 
 She then told me, that she had bribed the Chief Priest, and in what manner that pious person had saved her from the flames, for a considerable sum of
 
money. He caused a passage to be made privately under ground by the other priests, whom he entrusted with the secret. The funeral pile was erected over that subterranean passage, into which, said she, I descended, after having set fire to the reeds that consumed nothing but my husband's body. The night being come, and the spectators retired, the Chief Priest himself conducted me to this house that I had hired before-hand. 
 But, my Princess, said I, why deceive the people by a pretended death? Why feign to follow your aged husband? They forced you not to die with him; you might have spared that dissimulation. No, replied the lady, I found myself under the necessity of doing what I have done; you will be convinced of this truth, when I tell you that I have a design to join my fate to your's, to abjure idolatry, and to go to Basra with you, and profess the religion of Mahomet. It must have been your prophet himself that inspired me with this great enterprise. My relations now believing me dead, I can without fear leave Serendib, and unite my lot to your's. This was the motive that urged me to an action, that not only amazes you, but, without doubt, astonishes the world; for they well know, that I never loved the old Lord whom I married in obedience to the King. They imagine that the vanity of passing for a heroine, and having a statue among the pagods, induced me to die with my husband; but reason, or perhaps my love for you, made me reflect maturely on so superstitious a sacrifice. 
 And is it then, my Queen, said I, in favour of Aboulfaouaris, that you have employed this ingenious stratagem? Was it to live with me, that you resolved to go from Ceylon? Is it to crown me with joy that you resolve to follow the doctrine of our great prophet? Oh beautiful Canzada! at this moment you make me the happiest of men. I threw myself at her knees, and embraced them with transport. Rise up, Aboulfaouaris, said she, I doubt whether you have reason to boast so much of your happiness; Canzada is no longer so precious a conquest: Alas! I am not now mistress of all the riches I gave you with my heart: I have given the best part of them to the priests that served me; and I paid dear to the Governor of Ceylon, for his permission to devote myself to the flames with my deceased husband. 
 At these words, which gave me so fair an occasion to declare my love, I looked on her with tenderness, and said, how unjust, my charming Canzada, are you to suspect me of not having sentiments as free from self-interest as your own! When in the stately palace, where you detained me, you exposed your treasures to my view, I call Heaven to witness, my heart was set on you alone. 
 She told me, that my sentiments were such as she desired; that she was not stript of all, and that she had jewels enough still to make her a fortune, wherewith I should have reason to be content. She spoke of the mischiefs she had occasioned me, and
 
said, she had sufficiently atoned for them by her grief. We agreed after this, to go for Basra as soon as possible. I took leave of my landlord, conducted her that night to the harbour, and embarked with her, and some faithful slaves who carried her jewels. 
 We arrived at Surat without the least danger, and found there a Basra ship that was returning home. We made use of the occasion, and, as if Heaven were willing to let us know that it favoured us, we arrived at Basra with the most fortunate expedition. 
 No joy could equal that of my father when he saw me again. After our first embraces, I presented Canzada to him, whose quality needed no boast: Her noble air and her beauty confessed at full what she was. He received her with the highest tokens of esteem, and conceived for her all the tenderness of a father. When he had heard her story, which I related to him in the terms of a passionate lover, I then gave him an account of my travels. He afterwards informed me, that he had received my pearls from the Captain, who had taken charge of them. 
 My father and I conducted the lady to the Cady, to whom she abjured her idolatrous faith, before many witnesses. He then asked her, if she consented that I should be her husband? She answered, that it was the dearest desire of her heart; and upon that answer the Judge married us. My father, to
 
celebrate our nuptials, invited our relations and friends to a splendid feast and great rejoicings, which lasted six days together. 
 
 
 
 
 
 DIALOGUE VII. 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 BEFORE we read our long story yesterday, I told you, children, that the moral most conspicuous in it was the value and necessity of Fortitude. I shall now take occasion to continue that subject, by pointing out to you the beauty and worth of this inestimable virtue. You must have patience, if I seem prolix. 
 That it is the duty of a man to be equal to all fortunes, is a doctrine that cannot be too strongly inculcated: And the reasons why he should be so, are so plain, so conspicuous, that when I look round, and see all the world, with very few exceptions, shrinking from the most trifling degrees of pain, grieving at insignificant accidents, and desponding beneath common misfortunes, I am amazed. 
 Let us but reflect, that the utmost malice of fate can do nothing more than deprive us of life, and
 
that the longest life must very soon inevitably end; and what will there remain for us to fear? Besides, if the evils that afflict us be in our own power to remove, to grieve would be ridiculous, as well as pusillanimous; and if they be not, but are without remedy, to be terrified, or sink under them, is equally so. How many people make their lives miserable, by a continued round of false alarms? Every occurrence in the day is a misfortune. If they cut a finger, they mourn over it; if their head ach, they are going to die; and if the apothecary sends a draught, the taste is so nauseous, that, after tormenting themselves with irresolute attempts to force it down, they fling it away. At night, when they should rest from their cares, and enjoy a temporary death, the reality of which appears horrible, they cannot sleep, for the dread of thieves or fire; never considering that it were better to be robbed or suffer almost any punishment, than live in the fear of that punishment. 
 Oh! my children, I would have you despise the pusillanimity that would discompose a feature while you swallow a potion, or stretch forth a limb to have a wound dressed. Be assured, that pain decreases in proportion as it is defied, and becomes horrible as the fear of it is indulged; and remember likewise, that it is impossible to be happy, much less magnanimous, till you are masters of your own fate, till you can behave with equanimity under all fortunes; that is, till you are superior to fear. 
 It is only those opportunities where the possession of fortitude is apparent, that discover the truly great man. What a noble, what a superior magnanimity, did Fabricius shew before Pyrrhus! The command he had obtained over himself, his unshaken steadiness, and the reliance he could place on it, was so great, that it was astonishing. He was sent Ambassador from the Romans, to treat with Pyrrhus concerning the ransom, or exchange, of prisoners. At their first interview, Pyrrhus, who had heard, from Cineas, a great character of Fabricius, prest him to receive a valuable present in gold; not with a view to engage him in any thing dishondurable, but as a pledge of friendship and hospitality. This he peremptorily refused. The next day, Pyrrhus had a mind to make another essay on him, by endeavouring to astonish, or rather to terrify him. He knew Fabricius had never seen an elephant; he commanded, therefore, one of the largest, compleatly armed, to be placed behind some curtains in the room where they were to confer. Upon a signal given, the curtains were suddenly drawn, and the elephant raising his trunk over the head of Fabricius, made a most horrid bellowing. The Roman, without the least sign of terror or surprize, turned and looked at the beast; then addressing Pyrrhus, with a smile, said, "Sir, neither could your money yesterday, nor your monster to-day, make the least impression on me." 
 The year following, when Fabricius was Consul, and at the head of the army, an unknown person came to the camp, and delivered him a letter from the King's chief Physician, who offered to take off Pyrrhus by poison, and, in that way, end the war, without farther hazard to the Romans, provided they would give him a reward proportionate to his service. Fabricius, enraged at the villainy of the Physician, after bringing the other Consul to be of the same opinion, sent dispatches to Pyrrhus immediately, to warn him of his danger. His letter ran thus: 
 "Caius Fabricius, and Quintius Emilius, Consuls of the Romans, to Pyrrhus the King; health." 
 "You seem to have made a very ill judgment both of your friends and enemies. You will understand by the enclosed letter, which was sent to us, that you are at war with honest men, and trust in knaves and villains. We have not discovered this to you to insinuate ourselves into your favour, but lest your ruin might bring a reproach upon us; as if we had ended the war by treachery, when we were not able to do it by our courage and our virtue." Do not your hearts glow, my children, at heroism like this? Will you not remember, will you not emulate, such actions? 
 I shall cite a few more examples of the dignity of Fortitude, that you may perceive how respectable, how superior it makes men, and in what a glorious sanctity it preserves their characters to the latest posterity. 
 Caracalla the emperor, that cruel and inexorable tyrant, began his reign by murdering his brother Geta in the arms of his mother, to whom he had fled for refuge. Papinian was at that time a civilian in Rome, of the greatest estimation. To him Caracalla applied, in order to be vindicated by his writings: but Papinian, disregarding his own life, intrepidly replied, "It is easier to commit a parricide than to justify it." For which answer he was beheaded, it is true; but who does not revere the magnanimous, the virtuous Papinian, that had the fortitude to defy death, rather than, by a despicable, a wicked compliance, incur the contemptuous curse of posterity, only to prolong a short and ignominious existence? 
 Of all nations, indeed, whether ancient or modern, the Romans appear to have possessed the most sublime, unremitted, and stupendous fortitude. Porsenna, when he besieged Rome, had defeated the Romans, who were flying in the greatest consternation, and were pursued by the enemy to the bridge, over which both victors and vanquished were about to enter the city in the confusion. All appeared lost, when Horatius Cocles, who had been placed there as a centinel, opposed himself to the torrent of the enemy, and assisted only by two more, for some time sustained the whole fury of the assault, till the bridge was broken down behind him. When he found the communication thus cut off, plunging with his arms into the torrent of the Tiber, he swam
 
back victorious to his fellow-soldiers, and was received, honoured, and rewarded by his countrymen, as the saviour of Rome. 
 Still, however, Porsenna was determined upon taking the city; and though five hundred of his men were slain in a sally of the Romans, he reduced it to the greatest straits, and turning the siege into a blockade, resolved to take it by famine. The distress of the besieged soon began to be insufferable, and all things seemed to threaten a speedy surrender, when another act of fortitude and bravery, still superior to that which had saved the city before, again promised its deliverance. 
 Mutius, a youth of undaunted courage, was resolved to rid his country of an enemy that so sorely continued to oppress it; and, for this purpose, disguised in the habit of an Etrurian peasant, entered the camp of the enemy, resolving to die, or to kill die king. With this resolution, he made up to the place where Porsenna was paying his troops, with the secretary by his side: but mistaking the latter for the king, he stabbed him to the heart, and was immediately apprehended and brought into the royal presence. Upon Porsenna's demanding who he was, and the cause of so heinous an action, Mutius, without reserve, informed him of his country and his design, and, at the same time, thrusting his right hand into the fire burning upon an altar before him, "You see, cried he, how little I regard the severest punishment your cruelty can inflict upon me, A
 
Roman knows not only how to act, but how to suffer. I am not the only person you have to fear. Three hundred of the Roman youth, like me, have conspired your destruction, therefore prepare for their attempts." Porsenna, amazed at so much fortitude, had too noble a mind not to acknowledge merit, though found in an enemy. He therefore ordered him to be safely conducted to Rome, and offered such conditions of peace, as were accepted. 
 Modern times likewise, my children, afford numerous examples of heroic virtue and inflexible perseverance in right. I will select one, and a noble instance it is, from the history of our own country. 
 When our great Henry V. was Prince of Wales, he, led astray by youthful passions, associated himself with the vicious and dissolute. One of his servants, or rather companions, was apprehended for felony, and brought to the bar of the King's Bench, where the chief justice, Gascoign, was then sitting. The prince heard of this transaction, and, inflamed by the misrepresentations of his lewd associates, flew raging into the court, where his servant stood arraigned, and commanded him to be unfettered and set at liberty. The judge endeavoured to repress this outrage, and appease the prince, by exhorting him to pay a proper respect to the ancient and established laws of the land; and, if he wished to exempt his servant from punishment, to apply to the king, his father, who alone held the power of a legal reprieve. But the prince, indulging his passion, instead
 
of listening to this very proper remonstrance, proceeded to use force for the release of the prisoner. The judge, foreseeing the dangerous consequence of such a flagrant breach of the constitution, elevated his voice, and in a bold authoritative tone, commanded the prince, on his allegiance, to leave the prisoner and depart the place. The prince, inflamed beyond all bounds flew with his drawn sword to the judgment-seat, while no one dared to molest him, though all dreaded the event. The judge alone seemed undisturbed, and superior to passion. Without shrinking, with the same unaltered countenance, the same tone of voice, the same cool, undaunted, but unimpassioned deportment, "Sir, said he to the prince, recollect yourself I sit here the representative of the King, your sovereign Lord and Father In his name I charge you to desist from your disobedient and unlawful enterprize Learn to give a good example to those who shall hereafter become your own subjects, and for this present contempt and disobedience, go YOU now to the prison of the King's Bench, whereunto I commit you, until the pleasure of the king, your father, shall be known." The prince, convinced of his enormity, ashamed of his intemperance, and struck with the sedate and awful fortitude of the judge, threw down his sword, bowed to the magistrate, and voluntarily went to prison. "Blessed be God," said Henry IV. when he heard of this transaction "Blessed be God who hath given me a
 
judge that dares administer justice, and a son that dares revere the laws." 
 I might relate a thousand anecdotes, and adduce a thousand histories, all tending to illustrate the doctrines I have been teaching: I shall, however, quit this subject, after having read to you two letters, both written from and to eminent men. The first from Plutarch to the Emperor Trajan, and the other from Sir Walter Raleigh to Prince Henry. I need make no comments. They both speak the dauntless language of men resolved to discharge their duty; especially the latter. 
 
 
 PLUTARCH'S LETTER TO TRAJAN. 
 SINCE your merits and not your importunities have advanced you to the empire, permit me to congratulate your virtues, and my own good fortune. If your future government prove answerable to your former worth, I shall be happy. But if you become worse for power, your's will be the danger, and mine the ignominy of your conduct. The errors of the pupil will be changed upon his instructor. Seneca is reproached for the enormities of Nero, and Socrates and Quintilian have hot escaped censure for the misconduct of their respective scholars. But you have it in your power to make me the most honoured of men, by continuing what you are. Persevere in the command of your passions, and make virtue the scope of all your actions. If you follow these instructions, then will I glory in my having
 
presumed to give them: if you neglect what I offer, then will this letter be my testimony, that you have not erred through the counsel and authority of Plutarch. 
 
 
 Sir WALTER RALEIGH'S LETTER to Prince HENRY, eldest son of JAMES I. 
 May it please your Highness, 
 THE following lines are addressed to your Highness, from a man who values his liberty and a very small fortune, in a remote part of this island, under the present constitution, above all the riches and honours that he could any where enjoy under any other establishment. 
 You see, Sir, the doctrines that are lately come into the world, and how far the phrase has obtained, of calling your royal father God's Vicegerent; which ill men have turned both to the dishonour of God, and the impeachment of his Majesty's goodness. They adjoin vicegerency to the idea of being all-powerful, and not to that of being all-good. His Majesty's wisdom, it is to be hoped, will save him from the snare that may lie under gross adulations: but your youth, and the thirst of praise, which I have observed in you, may possibly mislead you to hearken to those charmers who would conduct your noble nature into tyranny. Be careful, O my prince! hear them not, fly from their deceits; you are in the succession to a throne, from whence no evil can be
 
imputed to you, but all good must be conveyed from you. 
 Your father is called the Vicegerent of heaven: while he is good, he is the vicegerent of heaven. Shall man have authority from the Fountain of good to do evil? No, my prince: let mean and degenerate spirits, which want benevolence, suppose your power impaired by a disability of doing injuries. If want of power to do ill, be an incapacity in a prince, with reverence be it spoken, it is an incapacity he hath in common with the Deity. Let me not doubt bat all pleas, which do not carry in them the mutual happiness of prince and people, will appear as absurd to your great understanding, as disagreeable to your noble nature. 
 Exert yourself, O generous prince, against such sycophants in the glorious cause of liberty; and assume such an ambition worthy of you to secure your fellow-creatures from slavery; from a condition as much below that of brutes, as to act without reason, is less miserable than to act against it. Preserve to your future subjects the divine right of being free agents: and to your own royal house the divine right of being their benefactors. Believe me, my prince, there is no other right can slow from God. While your Highness is forming yourself for a throne, consider the laws as so many common places in your study of the science of government; when you mean nothing but justice, they are an ease and help to you. This way of thinking is what gave men the glorious
 
appellation of Deliverers and Fathers of their country; this made the sight of them rouse their beholders into acclamations, and mankind incapable of bearing their very appearance, without applauding it as a benefit. Consider the inexpressible advantages which will ever attend your Highness, while you make the power of rendering men happy the measure of your actions. While this is your impulse, how easily will that power be extended. 
 The glance of your eye will give gladness, and your every sentence have a force of bounty. Whatever some men would insinuate, you have lost your subjects when you have lost their inclinations. You are to preside over the minds, not the bodies of men; the soul is the essence of the man, and you cannot have the true man against his inclinations. Choose therefore to be the King or the Conqueror of your people; it may be submission, but it cannot be obedience that is passive. 
 I am, SIR, 
 Your Highness's most faithful servant, WALTER RALEIGH. 
 London, Aug. 12, 1611.  
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 You will never think you admire this letter enough, my children, when you come thoroughly to understand the pernicious doctrine it was intended to combat. The divine right of kings was the destruction of the house of Stuart; and, but for
 
very peculiar circumstances, amazing exertions, and prodigious abilities, must have been the destruction of the constitution of England. 
 
 
 
 DIALOGUE VIII. 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 I GAVE you many examples in our last conversation of the sublime nature of Fortitude; I shall now give you a tragical instance of a contrary kind. As I so thoroughly explained myself upon this subject yesterday, we will proceed immediately to the story, and I have no doubt, children, but you will readily perceive the application. 
 
 
 
 
 TREACHERY, Or the HISTORY of MOSES GOLEMUS, General to SCANDERBEG THE GREAT, King of Epirus. 
 AMONG all the heroes of ancient or modern story, there are none whose courage, wisdom, and good fortune, have been more conspicuous than Scanderbeg's. King only of a small state and a handful of people, at a time when the Turkish empire flourished in all its splendor and all its ferocity;
 
when Europe and Asia trembled at the multitude and valour of its troops, Scanderbeg nobly asserted and maintained his independence, braved the fury of the Turk, vanquished his armies, and disgraced his victories. Amurath the Second, after various sieges and battles, died in Epirus, before the walls of Croia, cursing his ignominious fate, which after so many splendid conquests had sent him thus dishonourably to expire; baffled by a prince whose territories, with respect to extent, might rather be compared to the gardens of Amurath's seraglio, than to the Ottoman empire. Mahomet, his son and successor, the famous conqueror, who took Constantinople, and made the Christian world tremble, never could subdue Scanderbeg. Armies after armies invaded Epirus, and were all either destroyed, or obliged shamefully to retreat; for of all the various battles and skirmishes Scanderbeg was engaged in, and they were almost innumerable, he lost but one. 
 Mahomet, who from repeated experiments and reiterated defeats, began at length to despair of subduing Scanderbeg by open war, endeavoured to corrupt his generals. None among those was more renowned than Moses Golemus. This man had been with Scanderbeg in all his wars, was acquainted with all his, resources, all his stratagems, and beloved by all his soldiers. His valour and conduct had often been proved, and always to his honour; no man doubted his love to his country, or his loyalty to his prince, whose confidence he fully possessed.
 
Moses, who as a commander was second only to Scanderbeg, lay with a strong garrison in Dibra, a frontier town of Epirus, when Mahomet commanded the governor of Sfetigrade to endeavour, by every means within his power, to subvert the loyalty of Moses. Sfetigrade was a town which the Turks had long held in Epirus. This governor, who from the known character of Moses had little hope of success, was yet obliged to make the attempt, in obedience to the commands of the sultan. For this purpose he sent a Christian, an inhabitant of Sfetigrade, whom he had won to his interests by large gifts, to negotiate with Moses. The messenger he chose was a subtle man, plausible and discerning, and invested with full powers to make the most advantageous proposals to Moses, and to paint the esteem the sultan had for him and his abilities in the most flattering colours. He came to Dibra, and, under pretence of state secrets, gained a private audience of Moses, to whom, in the name of Mahomet, he offered whatever dignities the sultan could bestow. By the same authority likewise he demanded how he, who was known to be so great a captain, equal at least, if not superior to Scanderbeg, could condescend to serve so petty a prince. The messenger shewed him how easy it would be for him, if he had a proper confidence in his own capacity, to dethrone Scanderbeg, by causing a revolt in Epirus, and putting himself at the head of the Turkish armies. Moses, who, till this fatal moment,
 
had lived in the full enjoyment of content and acknowledged worth, sunk before the treacherous attacks of flattery and ambition. He dismissed the messenger without a positive answer, but with sufficient reason to hope for success. 
 After the departure of the messenger, a thousand troubled thoughts arose in the hitherto peaceful mind of Moses: his mirth was turned into melancholy; the chearfulness of his countenance vanished; distracting fears and haughty wishes were his solitary companions, and an imaginary kingdom the idol he secretly adored. Several discerning people observed this sudden change, and some of his friends asked him concerning the business of that secret messenger; to whom he replied, that he was a person from whom he received private intelligence of matters that concerned the good of the state. This answer was satisfactory, for who could once think of distrusting Moses? 
 It happened about this time, when the loyalty of Moses had been sufficiently overthrown by various negociations and splendid promises from the Turk, that Scanderbeg arrived before the walls of Belgrade, the only defeat he ever experienced from the Mahometans. This was what Moses deemed the proper opportunity to declare himself, this was the moment to subvert his friends and soldiers from their allegiance. For this purpose, when the news arrived at Dibra he pretended at first to be greatly afflicted, and with many words to lament the misfortune of
 
Scanderbeg, and the miseries of Epirus, taking care at the same time to describe the great power of Mahomet, and to endeavour to fill the minds of his hearers with distrust and fear. To his intimates he was more sincere; he related to them the mighty promises of Mahomet, the honours he would confer on all those who should be instrumental to a revolt, and the great ease with which it might be then effected. He was heard by them with astonishment and pity, but, to their glory be it remembered, without success: he, therefore, thought it safest to fly, which he did, accompanied only by a few of the lowest and most disorderly of the common soldiers, and after procuring safe conduct from the governor of Sfetigrade, arrived at Constantinople, when he was joyfully received and greatly caressed by Mahomet. 
 When Scanderbeg first learnt the news of the revolt of Moses, so great had been his opinion of his fidelity, that he stood speechless with astonishment. After a little reflection, however, and finding the fact really to be so, he, with true dignity, endeavoured to palliate instead of magnifying the crime: he remembered the former virtues and services of Moses, and said, his temptations had been such as might cause a truly great and constant man to err; he would not listen to those who appeared willing to aggravate the offence, but said, he only wished that all treason and ill fortune were fled with Moses out of Epirus; he remembered the loyalty of those
 
whom Moses had tried to seduce, and rejoiced in the faith and love of his subjects. 
 Though Mahomet gladly received the fugitive Epirot, he was not at first without suspicion; he knew the former stratagems of Scanderbeg and of Moses; he dreaded a counterplot, and refused, for some time, to listen to the solicitations of Moses, who was eager to put himself at the head of the Turks, and invade his promised kingdom: after, however, having placed spies upon him, and having watched him himself, and discoursed with him upon the mode of conducting the war in Epirus, and finding him devoted to ambition, and estranged from Scanderbeg, he gave him the command of fifteen thousand horse, which was all Moses desired for this conquest, and sent him against the foe that Mahomet most hated and most feared. The soldiers appointed for this service were but half willing to go; they dreaded the fatal country of Epirus; they remembered how many Turks had gone there, never to return; they thought the present army far too small, though superior to that of Scanderbeg; and nothing gave them hopes of success, but the great opinion they had of their commander. 
 Thus furnished, with a fine army, and every warlike appointment, Moses set forward to carry desolation into the land of his nativity, and to oppose his former dearest friend, the sovereign he once had loved and assisted with all his powers.
 
Scanderbeg, who was informed of his route, met him upon the frontiers of his kingdom, determined to give him fair and open battle; for he knew Moses was too intimately acquainted with the stratagems by which he had formerly beat the Turks, and likewise with the whole face of the country, to be subdued by policy. The battle was long and desperate; both commanders did every thing that could be expected from their courage and experience; they fought with the most daring intrepidity, and directed with coolness and determined fortitude: at length the valour and fortune of Scanderbeg prevailed, the Turks were routed, and a terrible slaughter ensued. In vain did Moses exhort them by his words and his example to continue the fight; the arms of Scanderbeg and the scimitars of his illustrious soldiers, who were an army of heroes, carried death at every stroke, and gave decisive victory. Eleven thousand of the Mahometans were left upon the field, and the rest escaped, conducted by Moses through mountainous passages, with which he was perfectly acquainted. This sudden and entire defeat lowered his character so much in the opinion of the Turks, that they held him afterwards in the utmost derision. He could by no persuasions prevail on the remainder of his troops to accompany him in an attempt upon Dibra, where he still hoped he had friends, and by whose help he thought still to occasion a revolt. Finding no remedy, he marched them back to Constantinople with a heavy heart and a dejected countenance,
 
despised by the Turks and threatened by the sultan, who, had it not been for the advice of his viziers, who shewed him the impolicy of such a measure, would have put him to death. 
 Of so little estimation was he now become in the Ottoman court, that his allowance was scarcely sufficient for his maintenance; and though he appeared to bear his misfortunes patiently, he was inwardly so afflicted, that he could neither eat nor drink: the remembrance of his former treason was continually before his eyes, and the disgrace he suffered at the Turkish court, tormented him with intolerable grief. He was conscious of having done every thing in his power in the late battle; and the frowns of Mahomet, who estimated abilities by events only, filled him with a secret indignation. Sometimes he thought of escaping from Constantinople, and throwing himself upon the clemency of his prince, whom he knew to be of a noble and forgiving nature; but when he recollected the extent of his ingratitude, he was struck with shame. However, after an afflicting struggle of contending passions, he at last resolved to submit to the mercy of Scanderbeg, rather choosing to stand the chance of suffering the desert of his crimes in his own country, than to have the derision of a people he despised. He accordingly fled to Dibra. When the soldiers beheld their old governor thus despondent and repenting, they forgot the evils he had been the occasion of, and moved with compassion, received him
 
with tears and friendly embraces, and brought him to Scanderbeg, who lay encamped not far from them. The manner in which Moses approached him was awful and humiliating. He put his girdle round his neck, in token of his deserts, as was the custom of the Epirots, and with the most sensible contrition fell upon his knees before Scanderbeg, who was walking in the front of his tent. Scanderbeg, as benevolent in peace as terrible in war, raised him from the earth, embraced him, and, as a certain token of forgiveness in Epirus, kissed his cheek. He did not stop here; he caused all his lands and riches to be restored, re-instated him in all his former trusts and employments, and, by open proclamation, commanded that no man should hereafter mention the trespass. 
 After this Moses served Scanderbeg in his wars with still greater zeal and assiduity, than he had formerly done; but happening in a skirmish, contrary to the advice of Scanderbeg, to pursue a flying party of Turks too far, he fell into an ambuscade, was taken prisoner, carried to Constantinople, and, by the command of Mahomet, put to a cruel death; a fate which in all probability he would never have suffered, had he never been a Traitor. 
 
 
 
 
 MRS. EGERTON. 
 Poor Moses! what a pity it is so great a man should have left the paths of virtue. 
 
 
 
 HARRY EGERTON. 
 I am sure, mamma, that Turk Mahomet was a cruel good for nothing man. 
 
 
 CHARLES EGERTON. 
 Ay, brother, but what a brave hero Scanderbeg was. I love him because he was so courageous. 
 
 
 NANCY EGERTON. 
 And I love him because he was so merciful. 
 
 
 CHARLES EGERTON. 
 Yes, sister, so do I love him for that too; but if he had not been brave, you know he would not have had the power to be merciful. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 But do not forget, my children, that the misfortunes of Moses sprang from his want of fortitude; had he possessed that, he would have despised the ambition which prompted him to renounce every tie of friendship, gratitude, and love for his country: he would have remembered that true greatness neither consists in titles or power, but in an inflexible perseverance in doing right. As a continuation of the same subject, we will read the tale of Amurath, a most ingenious, original, and sublime fable; the moral of which is, that no man can be happy, till he has the resolution to listen attentively to the silent dictates of truth and reason. 
 
 
 
 
 
 CONSCIENCE, Or the STORY of AMURATH. 
 AMURATH, sultan of the East, the judge of nations, the disciple of adversity, records the wonders of his life: let those who presumptuously question the ways of Providence, blush in silence and be wise; let the proud be humble and obtain honour; and let the sensual reform and be happy. 
 The angel of Death closed the eyes of the sultan Abradin my father, and his empire descended to me in the eighteenth year of my age. At first my mind was awed to humility, and softened with grief; I was insensible to the splendor of dominion, I heard the addresses of flattery with disgust, and received the homage of dependant greatness with indifference. I had always regarded my father not only with love but reverence; and I was now perpetually recollecting instances of his tenderness, and reviewing the solemn scene, in which he recommended me to Heaven in imperfect language, and grasped my hand in the agonies of death. 
 One evening, after having concealed myself all day in his chamber, I visited his grave: I prostrated myself on his tomb; sorrow overflowed my eyes, and devotion kindled in my bosom. I felt myself suddenly smitten on the shoulder as with a rod; and looking up, I perceived a man whose eyes were piercing as light, and his beard whiter than snow. "I
 
am, said he, the Genius Syndarac, the friend of thy father Abradin, who was the fear of his enemies and the desire of his people; whose smile diffused gladness like the lustre of the morning, and whose frown was dreadful as the gathering of a tempest: resign thyself to my influence, and thou shalt be like him." I bowed myself to the earth in token of gratitude and obedience, and he put a ring on the middle finger of my left-hand, in which I perceived a ruby of a deep colour and uncommon brightness. "This ring, said he, shall mark out to thee the boundaries of good and evil; that, without weighing remote consequences, thou mayest know the nature and tendency of every action. Be attentive therefore to the silent admonition: and when the circle of gold shall, by a sudden contraction, press thy finger, and the ruby shall grow pale, desist immediately from what thou shalt be doing, and mark down that action in thy memory, as a transgression of the Rule of Right: keep my gift as a pledge of happiness and honour, and take it not off for a moment." I received the ring with a sense of obligation which I strove to express, and an astonishment that compelled me to be silent. The Genius perceived my confusion, and turning from me with a smile of complacency, immediately disappeared. 
 During the first moon I was so cautious and circumspect, that my pleasure in reflecting that my ring had not once indicated a fault, was lessened by my doubts of its virtue. I applied myself to the public
 
business. My melancholy decreased, as my mind was diverted to other objects; and, lest the youths of my court should think that recreation was too long suspended, I appointed to hunt the lion. But though I went out to the sport rather to gratify others than myself, yet my usual ardour returned in the field; I grew warm in the pursuit, I continued the chace, which was unsuccessful, too long, and returned fatigued and disappointed. 
 As I entered the seraglio, I was met by a little dog that had been my father's, who expressed his joy at my return, by jumping round me and endeavouring to reach my hand: but as I was not disposed to receive his caresses, I struck him in the fretfulness of my displeasure so severe a blow with my foot, that it left him scarce power to crawl away, and hide himself under a sofa, in the corner of the apartment. At this moment I felt the ring press my finger, and looking upon the ruby, I perceived the glow of its colour abated. 
 I was at first struck with surprise and regret; but surprise and regret quickly gave way to disdain. "Shall not the sultan Amurath, said I, to whom a thousand kings pay tribute, and in whose hand is the life of nations, shall not Amurath strike a dog that offends him, without being reproached for having transgressed the Rule of Right? My ring again pressed my finger, and the ruby became more pale: immediately the palace shook with a burst of thunder,
 
and the Genius Syndarac again stood before me. 
 "Amurath, said he, thou hast offended against thy brother of the dust; a being who, like thee, has received from the Almighty a capacity of pleasure and pain: pleasure which caprice is not allowed to suspend, and pain which justice only has a right to inflict. If thou art justified by power in afflicting inferior beings, I should be justified in afflicting thee: but my power yet spares thee, because it is directed by the laws of sovereign goodness, and because thou mayest yet be reclaimed by admonition. But yield not to the impulse of quick resentment, nor indulge in cruelty the forwardness of disgust, lest by the laws of goodness I be compelled to afflict thee; for he that scorns reproof, must be reformed by punishment, or lost for ever." 
 At the presence of Syndarac I was troubled, and his words covered me with confusion: I fell prostrate at his feet, and heard him pronounce with a milder accent, "Expect not henceforth that I should answer the demands of arrogance, or gratify the curiosity of speculation: confide in my friendship, and trust implicitly to thy ring." 
 As the chace had produced so much infelicity I did not repeat it, but invited my nobles to a banquet, and entertained them with dancing and music. I had given leave that all ceremony should be suspended, and that the company should treat me not as a sovereign but an equal, because the conversation
 
would otherwise be incumbered or restrained; and I encouraged others to pleasantry, by indulging the luxuriancy of my own imagination. But tho' I affected to throw off the trappings of royalty, I had not sufficient magnanimity to despise them. I enjoyed the voluntary deference which was paid me, and was secretly offended at Alibeg my visier, who endeavoured to prevail upon the assembly to enjoy the liberty that had been given them, and was himself an example of the conduct that he recommended. I singled out as the object of my raillery, the man who alone deserved my approbation: he believed my condescension to be sincere, and imagining that he was securing my favour, by that behaviour which had incurred my displeasure; he was, therefore, grieved and confounded to perceive, that I laboured to render him ridiculous and contemptible: I enjoyed his pain, and was elated at my success; but my attention was suddenly called to my ring, and I perceived the ruby change colour. I desisted for a moment; but some of my courtiers having discovered and seconded my intention, I felt my vanity and my resentment gratified; I endeavoured to wash away the remembrance of my ring with wine; my satire became more bitter, and Alibeg discovered yet greater distress. My ring again reproached me; but I still persevered. The visier was at length roused to his defence; probably he had discovered and despised my weakness: his replies were so poignant, that I became outrageous, and descended from raillery to
 
invective: at length disguising the anguish of his mind with a smile, "Amurath, said he, if the Sultan should know, that after having invited your friends to festivity and merriment, you had assumed this authority, and insulted those who were not aware that you disdained to be treated with the familiarity of friendship, you would certainly fall under his displeasure." The severity of this sarcasm, which was extorted by long provocation from a man warmed with wine, stung me with intolerable rage; I started up, and spurning him from the table, was about to draw my poignard; when my attention was again called to my ring, and I perceived with some degree of regret, that the ruby had faded almost to a perfect white. 
 But, instead of being resolved to be more watchful against whatever might bring me under this silent reproof, I comforted myself, that the Genius would no more alarm me with his presence. The irregularities of my conduct increased almost imperceptibly, and the intimations of my ring became proportionably more frequent, though less forcible, till at last they were so familiar, that I scarce remarked when they were given and when suspended. 
 It was soon discovered that I was pleased with servility; servility therefore was practised, and I rewarded it sometimes with a pension and sometimes with a place. Thus the government of my kingdoms was left to petty tyrants, who oppressed the people to enrich themselves. In the mean time, I filled my seraglio
 
with women, and abandoned myself to sensuality. But I had not yet stained my hands with blood, nor dared to ridicule the laws which I had neglected to fulfil. 
 My resentment against Alibeg, however unjust, was inflexible, and terminated in the most perfect hatred; I degraded him from his office; but I still kept him at Court, that I might imbitter his life by perpetual indignities, and practise against him new schemes of malevolence. 
 Selima, the daughter of this prince, had been intended by my father for my wife: and the marriage had been delayed only by his death: but the pleasure and the dignity that Alibeg would derive from this alliance, had now changed my purpose. Yet such was the beauty of Selima, that I gazed with desire; and such was her wit, that I listened with delight. I therefore resolved, that I would, if possible, seduce her to voluntary prostitution; and that when her beauty should yield to the charm of variety, I would dismiss her with marks of disgrace. But in this attempt I could not succeed; my solicitations were rejected, sometimes with tears, and sometimes with reproach. I became every day more wretched, by seeking to bring calamities on others; I considered my disappointment as the triumph of a slave, whom I wished but did not dare to destroy; and I regarded his daughter as the instrument of my dishonour. Thus the tenderness, which before had shaken my purpose, was weakened; my desire
 
of beauty became as selfish and as sordid an appetite as my desire of food; and, as I had no hope of obtaining the complete gratification of my lust and my revenge, I determined to enjoy Selima by force, as the only expedient to alleviate my torment. 
 She resided by my command in an apartment of the seraglio, and I entered her chamber at midnight by a private door, of which I had a key; but with inexpressible vexation I found it empty. To be thus disappointed in my last attempt, at the very moment in which I thought I had insured success, distracted me with rage; and instead of returning to my chamber, and concealing my design, I called for her women. They ran in pale and trembling: I demanded the lady; they gazed at me astonished and terrified, and then looking upon each other, stood silent: I repeated my demand with fury and execration, and to enforce it, called aloud for the ministers of death they then fell prostrate at my feet, and declared with one voice, that they knew not where she was; that they had left her, when they were dismissed for the night, sitting on a sofa pensive and alone; and that no person had since, to their knowledge, passed in or out of her apartment. 
 In this account, however incredible, they persisted without variation; and having filled the palace with alarm and confusion, I was obliged to retire without gaining any intelligence by what means I had been baffled, or on whom to turn my resentment. I reviewed
 
the transactions of the night with anguish and regret, and bewildered myself among the innumerable possibilities that might have produced my disappointment. I remembered that the windows of Selima's apartments were open, and I imagined that she might that way have escaped into the gardens of the seraglio. But why should she escape who had never been confined? If she had designed to depart, she might have departed by day. Had she an assignation? And did she intend to return, without been known to have been absent? This supposition increased my torment; because, if it were true, Selima had granted to my slave that which she refused to me. But all these conjectures were uncertain, I determined to make her absence a pretence to destroy her father. 
 In the morning I gave orders that her father should be seized and brought before me; but while I was yet speaking he entered, and prostrating himself, thus anticipated my accusation: "May the sultan Amurath, in whose wrath the angel of death goes forth, rejoice for ever in the smiles of heaven! Let the wretched Alibeg perish; but let my Lord remember Selima with mercy; let him dismiss the slave in whom he ceases to delight." I heard no more, but cried out, "Darest thou to mock me with a request, to dismiss the daughter whom thou hast stolen! Thou whose life, that has been so often forfeited, I have yet spared! Restore her within one hour, or affronted mercy shall give thee up." 
 "Oh! said he, let not the mighty sovereign of the East, sport with the misery of the weak. If thou hast doomed us to death, let us die together." 
 Though I was now convinced that Alibeg believed I had confined Selima, and decreed her death, yet I resolved to persist in requiring her at his hands; and therefore dismissed him with a repetition of my command, to produce her within an hour, upon pain of death. 
 My ring, which during this series of events, had given perpetual intimation of guilt, which was always disregarded, now pressed my finger so forcibly, that it gave me great pain, and compelled my notice. I immediately retired, and gave way to the discontent that swelled in my bosom. "How wretched a slave is Amurath to an invisible tyrant! A being, whose malevolence or envy has restrained me in the exercise of my authority as a prince, and whose cunning has contrived perpetually to insult me, by intimating that every action of my life is a crime! How long shall I groan under this intolerable oppression? This accursed ring is the badge and the instrument of my subjection and dishonour: he who gave it, is now, perhaps, in some remote region of the air; perhaps he rolls some planet in its orbit, agitates the southern ocean with a tempest, or shakes some distant region with an earthquake: but wherever he is, he has surely a more important employ than to watch my conduct. Perhaps he has
 
contrived this talisman, only to restrain me from the enjoyment of some good, which he wishes to withhold; I feel that my desires are controuled; and to gratify these desires is to be happy." As I pronounced these words I drew off the ring, and threw it to the ground with disdain and indignation: immediately the air grew dark; a cloud burst in thunder over my head, and the eye of Syndarac was upon me. I stood before him motionless and silent: horror thrilled in my veins, and my hair stood upright. I had neither power to deprecate his anger, nor to confess my faults. In his countenance appeared a calm severity, and he pronounced these words: "Thou hast now, as far as is in thy power, thrown off humanity, and degraded thy being; thy form therefore shall no longer conceal thy nature, nor thy example render thy vices contagious." He then touched me with his rod, and, while the sound of his voice yet vibrated in my ears, I found myself in the midst of a desart, not in the form of a man but of a monster, with the fore parts of my body like a wolf, and the hinder parts like a goat. I was still conscious to every event of my life, and my intellectual powers were continued, though my passions were irritated to frenzy. I now rolled in the sand in agonies not to be described; and now hastily traversed the desert, impelled only by the vain desire of flying from myself. I now bellowed with rage, and now howled in despair; this moment I breathed execrations
 
against the Genius, and the next reproached myself for having forfeited his friendship. 
 By this violent agitation of mind and body, the powers of both were soon exhausted: I crawled into a den which I perceived near me, and immediately sunk down in a state of insensibility. I slept; but sleep, instead of prolonging, put an end to this interval of quiet. The Genius still terrified me with his presence; I heard his sentence repeated, and felt again all the horrors of my transformation. When I waked, I was not refreshed: calamity, though it compelled me to admit slumber, can yet exclude rest. But I was now roused with hunger; for hunger, like sleep, is irresistible. 
 I went out in search of prey; and if I felt any allevation of misery besides the hope of satisfying my appetite, it was in the thought of tearing to pieces whatever I should meet, and inflicting some part of the evil which I endured; for though I regretted my punishment, I did not repent of my crimes: and as I imagined Syndarac would now neither mitigate nor increase my sufferings, I was not restrained, either by hope or fear, from indulging my disposition to cruelty and revenge. But while I was thus meditating the destruction of others, I trembled, left by some stronger savage I should be destroyed myself. 
 In the midst of this variety of torment, I heard the cry of dogs, the trampling of horses, and the shouts of the hunters; and such is the love of life,
 
however wretched, that my heart sunk within me at the sound. To hide myself was impossible, and I was too much enfeebled either to fly or resist. I stood still till they come up. At first they gazed on me with wonder, and doubted whether they should advance: but at length a slave threw a net over me, and I was dragged to the city. 
 I now entered the metropolis of my empire, amidst the noise and tumult of the rabble, who the day before would have hid themselves at my presence. I heard the sound of music at a distance: the heralds approached, and Alibeg was proclaimed in my stead. I was now deserted by the multitude, whose curiosity was diverted by the pomp of his procession; and was conducted to the place where other savages are kept, which custom has considered as part of the regalia. 
 My keeper was a black slave, whom I did not remember ever to have seen, and in whom it would indeed have been a fatal presumption to have stood before me. After he had given me food, and the vigour of nature was restored, he discovered in me such tokens of ferocity, that he suffered me to fast many hours before I was again fed. I was so enraged at this delay, that, forgetting my dependance, I roared horribly when he again approached me: so that he found it necessary to add blows to hunger, that he might gain such an ascendancy over me, as was suitable to his office. By this slave, therefore, I was alternately beaten and famished, till the fierceness
 
of my disposition being suppressed by fear and languor, a milder temper insensibly stole upon me; and a demeanour that was begun by constraint, was continued by habit. 
 I was now treated with less severity, and strove to express something like gratitude, that might encourage my keeper to yet greater kindness. His vanity was flattered by my submission; and, to shew as well his courage as the success of his discipline, he ventured sometimes to caress me in the presence of those whose curiosity brought them to see me. A kind of friendship thus imperceptibly grew between us, and I felt some degree of the affection that I had feigned. It happened that a tyger which had been lately taken, brake one day into my den while my keeper was giving me my provision, and leaping upon him, would instantly have torn him to pieces, if I had not seized the savage by the throat, and dragged him to the ground: the slave presently dispatched him with his dagger, and turned about to caress his deliverer; but starting suddenly backward, he stood motionless with astonishment, perceiving that I was no longer a monster, but a dog. 
 I was myself conscious of the change which had again passed upon me, and leaping out of my den, escaped from my confinement. This transformation I considered as a reward for my fidelity, and was, perhaps, never more happy than in the first moments of my escape; for I reflected, that as a dog my liberty was not only restored, but insured; I was
 
no longer suspected of qualities which rendered me unfit for society; I had some faint resemblance of human virtue, which is not found in other animals, and therefore hoped to be more generally caressed. But it was not long before this joy subsided in the remembrance of that dignity from which I had fallen, and from which I was still at an immeasurable distance. Yet I lifted up my heart in gratitude to that Power, who had once more brought me within the circle of nature. As a brute I was more thankful for a mitigation of punishment, than as a king I had been for offers of the highest happiness and honour. And who, that is not taught by affliction, can justly estimate the bounties of Heaven? 
 As soon as the first tumult of my mind was past, I felt an irresistible inclination once more to visit the apartments of my seraglio. I placed myself behind an emir, whom I knew to have been the friend of Alibeg, and was permitted to follow him into the presence. The persons and the place, the retrospection of my life which they produced, and the comparison of what I was with what I had been, almost overwelmed me. I went unobserved into the garden, and lay down under the shade of an almond-tree, that I might indulge those reflections, which, though they oppressed me with melancholy, I did not wish to lose. 
 I had not been long in this place, before a little dog, which I knew to be the same that I spurned from me when he caressed me at my return from
 
hunting, came and fawned at my feet. My heart now smote me, and I said to myself, "Dost thou know me under this disguise? Is thy fidelity to thy lord unshaken? Cut off as I am from the converse of mankind, hast thou preserved for me an affection, which I once so lightly esteemed, and requited with evil? This forgetfulness of injury, and this steady friendship, are they less than human, or are they more?" I was not prevented by these reflections from returning those caresses that I received; and Alibeg, who just then entered the garden, took notice of me, and ordered that I should not be turned out. 
 In the seraglio I soon learned, that a body, which was thought to be mine, was found dead in the chamber; and that Alibeg had been chosen to succeed me, by the unanimous voice of the people. But I gained no intelligence of Selima, whose apartment I found in the possession of another, and for whom I had searched every part of the palace in vain. I became restless; every place was irksome; a desire to wander prevailed; and one evening I went out at the garden gate, and, travelling till midnight, I lay down at the foot of a sycamore-tree, and slept. 
 In the morning, I beheld with surprise a wall of marble that seemed to reach to heaven, and gates that were sculptured with every emblem of delight. Over the gate was inscribed in letters of gold, "Within this wall liberty is unbounded, and felicity complete: nature is not oppressed by the tyranny
 
of religion, nor is pleasure awed by the frown of virtue. The gate is obedient to thy wish, whosoever thou art: enter therefore, and be happy." 
 When I read this inscription, my bosom throbbed with tumultuous expectation: but my desire to enter was repressed by the reflection that I had lost the form, in which alone I could gratify the appetites of a man. Desire and curiosity were notwithstanding predominant: the door immediately opened inward; I entered, and it closed after me. 
 But my ears were now stunned with the dissonance of riot, and my eye sickened at the contorsions of misery: disease was visible in every countenance, however otherwise impressed with the character of rage, of drunkenness, or of lust. Rape and murder, revelling and strife, filled every street and every dwelling. 
 As my retreat was cut off, I went forward with timidity and circumspection; for I imagined, that I could no otherwise escape injury, than by eluding the notice of wretches, whose propensity to ill was restrained by no law; and I perceived too late, that to punish vice is to promote happiness. 
 It was now evening; and that I might pass the night in greater security, I quitted the public way, and perceiving a house that was encircled by a mote, I swam over to it, and chose an obscure corner of the area for my asylum. I heard from within the sound of dancing and music: but after a short interval, was alarmed with the menaces of rage, the
 
shrieks of terror, and the wailings of distress. The window of the banqueting room flew open, and some venison was thrown out which fell just at my feet. As I had eaten nothing since my departure from the seraglio, I regarded this as a fortunate accident; and after the pleasure of an unexpected repast, I again lay down in expectation of the morning, with hope and fear: but in a short time many persons rushed from the house with lights, and seemed solicitous to gather up the venison which had been thrown out; but not being able to find it, and at the same time perceiving me, they judged I had devoured it. I was immediately seized and led into the house: but as I could not discover, that I was the object either of malignity or kindness, I was in doubt what would be the issue of the event. It was not long before this doubt was solved; for I soon learned from the discourse of those about me, that I was suspected to have eaten poison which had been intended for another, and was secured, that the effect might either remove or confirm the suspicion. As it was not expected that the poison would immediately operate, I was locked up in the room by myself, where I reflected upon the cause and event of my confinement with inexpressible anguish, anxiety, and terror. 
 In this gloomy interval, a sudden light shone round me, and I found myself once more in the presence of the genius; I crawled towards him trembling and confounded, but not utterly without hope.
 
"Yet a few moments, said he, and the angel of death shall teach thee, that the wants of nature cannot be supplied with safety, where the inordinate appetites of vice are not restrained. Thy hunger required food: but the lust and revenge of others have given thee poison." My blood grew chill as he spake, I discovered and abhorred my folly: but while I wished to express my contrition, I fell down in an agony; my eyes failed me, I shivered, was convulsed, and expired. 
 That spark of immaterial fire which no violence can quench, rose up from the dust which had thus been restored to the earth, and now animated the form of a dove. On this new state of existence I entered with inexpressible delight; I imagined that my wings were not only a pledge of safety, but of the favour of Syndarac, whom I was now more than ever solicitous to please. I flew immediately from the window, and turning to the wall through which I had entered, I endeavoured to rise above it, that I might quit for ever a place in which guilt and wretchedness were complicated in every object, and which I now detested as much as before I had desired. But over this region a sulphureous vapour hovered like a thick cloud, which I had no sooner entered, than I fell down panting for breath, and had scarce strength to keep my wings sufficiently extended to break my fall. It was now midnight, and I alighted near the mouth of a cave, in which I thought there appeared some faint glimmerings of
 
light. Into this place I entered without much apprehension; as it seemed rather to be the retreat of Penitence, than the recess of Luxury: but left the noise of my wings should discover me to any hateful or mischievous inhabitant of this gloomy solitude, I entered in silence and upon my feet. As I went forward, the cave grew wider; and by the light of a lamp which was suspended from the roof, I discovered a hermit listening to a young lady, who seemed to be greatly affected with the events which she was relating. Of the hermit I had no knowledge; but the lady I discerned to be Selima. I was struck with amazement at this discovery; I remembered with the deepest contrition my attempts upon her virtue, and I now secretly rejoiced that she had rendered them ineffectual: I watched her lips with the utmost impatience of curiosity, and she continued her narrative. 
 "I was sitting on a sofa one evening after I had been caressed by Amurath, and my imagination kindled as I mused. Why, said I aloud, should I give up the delights of love with the splendor of royalty? Since the presumption of my father has prevented my marriage, why should I not accept the blessings that are still offered? Why is desire restrained by the dread of shame? And why is the pride of virtue offended by the softness of nature? Immediately a thick cloud surrounded me; I felt myself lifted up and conveyed through the air with incredible rapidity. I descended, the cloud dissipated,
 
and I found myself sitting in an alcove, by the side of a canal that encircled a stately edifice and a spacious garden. I saw many persons pass along; but discovered in all either something dissolute or wretched, something that alarmed my fears or excited my pity. I suddenly perceived many men with their swords drawn, contending for a woman, who was forced along irresistibly by the crowd, which moved directly towards the place in which I was sitting. I was terrified, and looked round me with eagerness to see where I could retreat for safety. A person richly dressed perceived my distress, and invited me into the house which the canal surrounded. Of this invitation I hastily accepted with gratitude and joy: but I soon remarked several incidents, which filled me with new perplexity and apprehension. I was welcomed to a place, in which infamy and honour were equally unknown; where every wish was indulged without the violation of any law, and where the will was therefore determined only by appetite. I was presently surrounded by women, whose behaviour covered me with blushes; and though I rejected the caresses of the person into whose power I was delivered, yet they became jealous of the distinction with which he treated me. My expostulations were not heard, and my tears were treated with merriment: preparations were made for revelling and jollity; I was invited to join the dance, and upon my refusal, I was entertained with music. In this dreadful situation, I sighed thus
 
to myself: "How severe is that justice which transports those who form licentious wishes, to a society in which they are indulged without restraint! Who shall deliver me from the effects of my own folly? Who shall defend me against the vices of others?" At this moment I was thus encouraged by the voice of some invisible being: "The friends of Virtue are mighty; reject not their protection, and thou art safe." As I renounced the presumptuous wish which had once polluted my mind, I exulted in this intimation with an assurance of relief, and when supper was set before me, I suffered the principal lady to serve me with some venison; but the friendly voice having warned me that it was poisoned, I fell back in my seat, and turned pale: the lady enquired earnestly what had disordered me; but instead of making a reply, I threw the venison from the window, and declared that she had intended my death. The master of the table, who perceived the lady to whom I spoke change countenance, was at once convinced, that she had indeed attempted to poison me, to preserve that interest which, as a rival, she feared I should subvert. He rose up in a rage, and commanded the venison to be produced; a dog that was supposed to have eaten it was brought in: but before the event could be known, the tumult was become general; and my rival, after having suddenly stabbed her patron, plunged the same poignard in her own bosom. 
 "In the midst of this confusion, I found means to escape, and wandered through the city in search of some obscure recess, where, if I received not the assistance which I hoped, death at last might secure my person from violence, and close mine eyes on those scenes, which, wherever I turned, filled me not only with disgust but with horror. By that benevolent power, who, as a preservative from misery, has placed in us a secret and irresistible disapprobation of vice, my feet have been directed to thee, whose virtue has participated in my distress, and whose wisdom may effect my deliverance." 
 I gazed upon Selima, while I thus learned the ardor of that affection which I had abused, with sentiments that can never be conceived but when they are felt. I was touched with the most bitter remorse for having produced one wish that could stain so amiable a mind; and abhorred myself for having used the power which I derived from her tenderness, to effect her destruction. My fondness was not less ardent, but it was more chaste and tender; desire was not extinguished, but it was almost absorbed in esteem. I felt a passion, to which, till now, I had been a stranger; and the moment love was kindled in my breast, I resumed the form proper to the nature in which alone it can subsist, and Selima beheld Amurath at her feet. At my sudden and unexpected appearance, the colour faded from her cheeks, the powers of life were suspended, and she sunk into my arms. I clasped her to my breast, and
 
looking towards the hermit for his assistance, I beheld in his stead the friendly genius, who had taught me happiness by affliction. At the same instant Selima recovered. "Arise, said Syndarac, and look round." We looked round; the darkness was suddenly dissipated, and we perceived ourselves in the road to Golconda, and the spires of the city sparkling before us. "Go, said he, Amurath, henceforth the husband of Selima, and the father of thy people! I have revealed thy story to Alibeg in a vision; he expects thy return, and the chariots are come out to meet thee. Go, and I will proclaim before thee, Amurath the Sultan of the East, the Judge of Nations, the Taught of Heaven; Amurath, whose ring is equal to the ring of Solomon, returns to reign with wisdom, and diffuse felicity." I now lifted up my eyes, and beheld the chariots coming forward. We were received by Alibeg with sentiments which could not be uttered, and by the people with the loudest acclamation: Syndarac proclaimed our return in thunder, that was heard thro' all the nations of my empire; and has prolonged my reign in prosperity and peace. 
 For the world I have written, and by the world let what I write be remembered: for to none who hear of the Ring of Amurath, shall its influence be wanting. Of this, is not thy heart a witness, thou whose eye drinks instruction from my pen? Hast thou' not a monitor who reproaches thee in secret when thy foot deviates from the path of virtue?
 
Neglect not the first whispers of this friend to thy soul; it is the voice of a greater than Syndarac, to resist whose influence, is to invite destruction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 DIALOGUE IX. 
 
 MRS. EGERTON. 
 LET us now, my children, relax a little from the severe virtues and too daring crimes of men, and take a view of the conduct of some women, who have been remarkable, by their behaviour, under circumstances of oppression, peril, and temptation. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 True, my dear, it will give variety. We will begin, if you please, with the story of Count Alberti. I shall forbear to say any thing beforehand of the moral it inculcates, because I would not destroy the effect the relation will probably have on your sensibility. 
 
 
 FIDELITY and CONJUGAL AFFECTION; or the Story of Count ALBERTI, as related by Mr. EVERARD, in Letters to his Friend. From the Italian. 
 Dear Sir, 
 THE pleasure I always take in writing to you, wherever I am and whatever doing, in some measure
 
dispels my present uneasiness; an uneasiness, caused at once by the disagreeable aspect of every thing round me, and the more disagreeable circumstances of the Count Alberti, with whom you were once acquainted. You remember him one of the gayest, most agreeable persons at the court of Vienna, at once the example of men, and the favourite of the fair sex. I often heard you repeat his name with esteem, as one of the few that did honour to the present age, as possessed of generosity and pity in the highest degree, as one who made no other use of fortune but to alleviate the distresses of mankind. This gentleman, sir, I wish I could say is now no more; yet too, unhappily for him, he exists but in a situation more terrible than the most gloomy imagination can conceive. After passing through several parts of the Alps, and having visited Germany, I thought I could not well return home without visiting the quicksilver mines at Idria, and seeing those dreadful subterraneous caverns, where thousands are condemned to reside, shut out from all hopes of ever seeing the chearful light of the sun, and obliged to toil out a miserable life, under the whips of impious task-masters. Imagine to yourself a hole on one side of a mountain, of about five yards over; down this you are conveyed in a kind of bucket, more than a hundred fathom, the prospect growing still more gloomy, yet still widening as you descend. At length, after swinging in terrible suspence for some time in this precarious situation,
 
you reach the bottom, and tread on the ground, which, by its hollow sound under your feet, and the reverberations of the echo, seems thundering at every step you take. In this gloomy and frightful solitude, you are assisted by the feeble gleam of lamps, here and there disposed, so as that the wretched inhabitants of these mansions can go from one part to another, without a guide. And yet let me assure you, that though they, by custom, could see objects distinctly by these lights, I could scarce discern, for some time, any thing, not even the person who accompanied me, to shew these scenes of horror. From this description, I presume, you have but a disagreeable idea of the place, yet let me assure you that it is a palace, if we compare the habitation with the inhabitants. Such wretches my eyes never before beheld. The blackness of their visages serves to conceal the horrid paleness, caused by the noxious qualities of the mineral they are employed in procuring. As they in general consist of malefactors condemned for life to this task, they are fed at the public expence; but consume little provision, for they lose their appetites in a short time, and commonly in about two years expire, from a total contraction of all the joints of the body. In this horrid mansion I walked after my guide for some time, pondering on the strange tyranny and avarice of mankind, when I was accosted by a voice behind, calling me by my name, and enquiring after my health with the most cordial affection.
 
I turned, and saw a creature all black and hideous, who approached me, and with a most piteous accent crying, "Ah, Mr. Everard, do not you know me?" Good God! what was my surprize, when, through the veil of his wretchedness, I discovered the features of my old and dear friend Alberti. I flew to him with affection, and, after a tear of condolence, asked how he came there? To this he replied, that having fought a duel with a general of the Austrian infantry, against the emperor's command, and having left him for dead, he was obliged to fly into one of the forests of Istria, where he was first taken, and afterwards sheltered by some banditti, who had long infested that quarter. With these he had lived for nine months, till by a close investiture of the place in which they were concealed, and after a very obstinate resistance, in which the greater part of them were killed, he was taken and carried to Vienna, in order to be broke alive upon the wheel. However, upon arriving at the capital, he was quickly known, and several of the associates of his accusation and danger witnessing his innocence, his punishment of the rack was changed into that of perpetual confinement and labour in the mines of Idria, a sentence, in my opinion, a thousand times worse than death. As Alberti was giving me this account, a young woman who seemed to be born for better fortune, came up to him: the dreadful situation she was in was not able to destroy her beauty, and even in this
 
scene of wretchedness, she seemed to have charms to grace the most brilliant assembly. This lady was in fact daughter to one of the first families of Germany; and having tried every means to procure her lover's pardon without effect, at last resolved to share those miseries, which she could not relieve. With him she accordingly descended into these mansions, from whence few of the living return; with him she was contented to live, forgetting the gaieties of life; with him to toil, despising the splendor of opulence; satisfied with the consciousness of her own constancy. 
 I am, dear Sir, Your's, &c. 
 
 
 MISS FORRESTER. 
 Indeed, madam, this is a very melancholy story. 
 
 
 MRS. EGERTON. 
 Yes, my dear Miss Forrester, it is a melancholy story, and what is worse, it is a fact and not a novel. 
 
 
 NANCY EGERTON. 
 Well, but mamma, here is another letter that will, perhaps, tell us something more about these unhappy lovers. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 It will, my dear. The next letter is the sequel. 
 
 
 
 LETTER II. 
 Dear Sir, 
 MY last to you was expressive, and, perhaps, too much so, of the gloomy state of my mind. The deplorable situation of the worthy man described in it, was enough to add double horror to the hideous mansion. At present, however, I have the happiness of informing you, that I was spectator of the most affecting scene ever beheld. Nine days after I had written my last, a person came post from Vienna to the little village, near the mouth of the great Shaft. He was soon after followed by a second, and then by a third. The enquiry was after the unfortunate count. Happening to overhear the demand, I gave them the necessary information. Two of these were the brother and cousin of the lady, the third was an intimate friend and fellow-soldier to the count. They came with his pardon, which had been procured by the general with whom the duel had been fought, and who was perfectly recovered from his wounds. I led them with an expedition of joy down to his dreary abode, presented to him his friends, and informed him of the happy change in his circumstances. It would be impossible to describe the joy that brightened upon his grief-worn countenance, nor was the young lady's emotion less vivid at seeing her friends, and hearing of her husband's freedom. Some hours
 
were employed in repairing the appearance of this faithful couple; nor could I, without a tear, behold him taking leave of the wretched companions of his former toil. To one he gave his mattock, to another his working cloaths, to a third his little houshold utensils, such as had been necessary to him in that situation. We soon emerged from the mine, when he once again revisited the light of the sun, which he had totally despaired of again seeing. A post-chaise and four was ready the next morning to take them to Vienna, where, as I am informed by a letter from himself, they arrived. The Empress has again taken him into favour; his fortune and rank are restored, and he and his fair partner have now the pleasing satisfaction of feeling happiness with double relish, as they once knew what it was to be truly miserable. 
 I am, dear Sir, Your's, &c. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 I am happy, methinks, to see you all so much affected. 
 
 
 NANCY EGERTON. 
 Oh dear, sir, this is a charming story. 
 
 
 MRS EGERTON. 
 I confess it has given me great pleasure, particularly in one circumstance, which, perhaps, you were not all equally attentive to. 
 
 
 
 NANCY EGERTON. 
 What was that, mamma? 
 
 
 MRS. EGERTON. 
 Why, my dear, from the first letter, I was secretly very much disturbed, because I had reason to fear that the young lady, whose conjugal fidelity I am sure you all admire, was not the wife of Count Alberti. How happy am I to find my suspicions were ill-founded! How respectable, how elevated was the conduct of that lady! Oh, my children, I would rather a thousand times see you, like her, devoted martyrs to duty and virtue, than to behold you emperors and queens. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 The amiable virtues of this lady cannot certainly be either spoken or thought of too highly. But this is not all, children. As I most earnestly desire you to imitate such bright examples of goodness, so likewise I would wish you to emulate those who, joining industry to genius, have become famous by their talents. To be active is so natural and so necessary to us, that we cannot be idle and be happy. Besides, it is our indispensible duty, while we live in society, to contribute, by every means in our power, to the benefit of that society. The peasant who tills the earth that we may eat, and the artizan who labours for our convenience, are truly respectable citizens; much, more so, my
 
children, than those weak, narrow-minded persons, who, from the industry, abilities, or rapacity of their forefathers, find themselves in the possession of accidental wealth and unmerited honour. Whoever supposes that his power, his riches, or his rank, exempt him from labouring to promote the general good, becomes useless, contemptible, and vicious. Such adventitious aids give the means of becoming more eminently beneficial; and no one can be a good or a worthy man, who does not assiduously employ the advantages he possesses for the public good. I am transported almost beyond myself, my children, when I speak or think on this subject. Patriotism, that is, the love not only of that particular country where we were born, or exist, but of all countries and of all men, is such a noble, such a superb virtue, that I would wish you all to encounter any danger, to brave any torture, rather than betray the cause of humanity, of liberty, and the rights of men. To understand these rights, to make them known, and to guard them, with a determined hand, sacred from violation, should be the inexorable resolution of those, who, by their opulence, have the leisure to study, and the means to protect. 
 But I have been insensibly led from the subject I intended to introduce; which was an account of Louisa Darbach, a woman famous for her genius. Your mother wished to give you more examples of conspicuous women. However, as I am advanced
 
thus far in describing a duty so essential to the character of a good citizen, as that of true patriotism, I am sure I shall have her approbation of my endeavours to enforce this duty. 
 Numerous are the examples which both antient and modern history furnish of this virtue: from these I will select two, which, in my opinion, are conspicuously great. The first is the behaviour of Regulus, a man famous for the purity of his intentions and the integrity of his heart. 
 Regulus was supposed to be the best and most consummate warrior that Rome could, in that age, produce. He was professedly frugal and severe, but less austere to others than to himself; he only reprehended those faults, which he would have died rather than have committed. His patriotism was still greater than his temperance: all the private passions seemed extinguished in him, or they were all swallowed up in one great ruling affection, the love of his country. In the first Punic war, he and Manlius were sent by the Romans into Africa, to invade the territories of the Carthaginians, with the largest fleet that had ever failed from an Italian port: this was met and engaged by another of the enemy's, equally, if not more, powerful. The battle was obstinate and desperate; the Roman general, however, triumphed; he took fifty-four of the enemy's ships, and dispersed the rest. The consequence was, an immediate descent upon the coast of Africa,
 
and the capture of the city Clupea, together with twenty thousand men, who were made prisoners of war. Manlius was then remanded back to Italy by the senate, and Regulus ordered to remain and prosecute his victories in Africa; and when his consulship was expired, he was continued general under the title of Proconsul. Happy in the approbation of his country, Regulus persevered in his efforts and his successes, and led his forces along the banks of the river Bagrada. 
 And here an incident happened, which, as it was very extraordinary, I shall stop to relate. While he was waiting the approach of the Carthaginians, a serpent of enormous size attacked his men as they went for water, and seemed as if resolved to guard the banks of the river. It was a hundred and twenty feet long, with scales impenetrable to any weapon. Some of the boldest troops went up at first to oppose its fury, but they soon fell victims to their rashness, being either killed by its devouring jaws, or crushed to pieces by the windings of its tail. The poisonous vapour that issued from it, made it still more formidable; and the men were so much terrified at its appearance, that they asserted they would much more joyfully face the whole Carthaginian army. For some time it seemed uncertain which should remain masters of the river, as from the hardness of its scales no ordinary efforts could drive it away. At last Regulus was obliged to make use of the machines employed in battering
 
down the walls of cities. Notwithstanding this, the serpent, for a long time, withstood all his efforts, and destroyed numbers of his men; but at length a very large stone, which was flung from an engine, happened to break its spine, and destroyed its motion. By these means the soldiers surrounded and killed it. Regulus, not less pleased with his victory than if he had gained a battle, ordered its skin to be sent to Rome, where it continued to be seen in the time of Pliny. 
 After this he engaged the Carthaginians, defeated and cut off some of their best troops, and took above eighty of their towns; while they, in despair, were obliged to send to Lacedemon for a general capable of opposing Regulus; at the same time dispatching some of the principal men of the state to him, to sue for a peace. 
 The Roman general had long wished to terminate the war, and go back to his native country. He had even sent to the senate some time before, demanding a successor, and leave to return, in consequence of an account he had received, informing him that his steward who cultivated his farm, which consisted but of seven acres, was dead, and that his servant had stolen all the instruments of husbandry that were used in its cultivation. He informed the senate, that while he was leading on the armies of the state, his wife and children were in danger of wanting bread, and that his little domestic affairs required his presence at home. The senate upon
 
this ordered his wife and children a sufficient maintenance, furnished his farm with proper instruments of husbandry, at the public expence, and gave him orders to continue at the head of the army. 
 The negociation for peace between the nations not succeeding, the Carthaginians committed the war to the care of Xantippus, the Spartan general, a man of consummate knowledge in the art of war: and Regulus was at last, after all his victories, defeated and taken prisoner. And now was the time in which the virtues of Regulus shone forth with still superior lustre. The affairs of the Carthaginians after this battle became more successful, but still they were desirous of a peace, and made new proposals, not doubting but they should obtain better terms than those insisted on before by the Romans. They therefore resolved to send to Rome to accomplish this business, or at least to procure an exchange of prisoners. For this purpose they supposed that Regulus, whom they had now for four years kept in a dungeon, confined and chained, would be a proper solicitor. It was expected that, being wearied with imprisonment and bondage, he would gladly endeavour to persuade his countrymen to a discontinuance of the war, which only prolonged his captivity. He was accordingly sent, with their ambassadors, to Rome, but with a promise, previously exacted from him, to return in case of being unsuccessful. He was even given to understand,
 
that his life depended upon the success of his expedition. 
 When this old general, together with the ambassadors of Carthage, approached Rome, numbers of his friends came out to meet him, and congratulate his return. Their acclamations resounded through the city, but Regulus refused, with settled melancholy, to enter the gates. It was in vain that he was intreated, on every side, to visit once more his little dwelling, and share in that joy which his return had inspired. He persisted in saying, that he was now but a slave belonging to the Carthaginians, and unfit to partake in the liberal honours of his country. The senate assembling without the walls, as usual, to give audience to the ambassadors, Regulus opened his commission, as he had been directed by the Carthaginian counsel, and their ambassadors seconded his proposals. The senate were, by this time, themselves weary of a war which had been protracted above eight years, and were no way disinclinable to peace. It seemed the general opinion, that the enmity between the two states had continued too long; and that no terms should be refused, which might give not only rest to the two nations, but liberty to an old brave general, whom the people reverenced and loved. It only remained for Regulus himself to give his opinion, who, when it came to his turn to speak, to the surprize of all the world, gave his voice for continuing the war. He assured the senate, that the Carthaginian resources
 
were now almost exhausted, the populace harrassed out with fatigues, and their nobles with contention: that all their best generals were prisoners with the Romans, while Carthage had none but the refuse of the Roman army: that not only the interest of Rome, but its honour was also concerned in continuing the war, for their ancestors had never made peace till they were victorious. 
 So unexpected an advice not a little disturbed the senate: they saw the justice of his opinion, but they also saw the danger he incurred by giving it: they seemed entirely satisfied of the expediency of prolonging the war; their only obstacle was, how to secure the safety of him who had advised its continuance: they pitied as well as admired a man who had used such eloquence against his private interest, and could not conclude upon a measure which was to terminate in his ruin. Regulus, however, soon relieved their embarrassment, by breaking off the treaty, and rising in order to return to his bonds and confinement. It was in vain that the senate and all his dearest friends intreated his stay; he still refused their solicitations. Maria, his wife, with her little children, filled the city with her lamentations, and vainly implored to be permitted to see him: he still obstinately persisted in keeping his promise; and though sufficiently apprized of the torture's that awaited his return, without embracing his family, or taking leave of his friends, he departed, with the ambassadors, for Carthage. 
 When the Carthaginians were informed of their ill-success, and the reason of it, by their ambassadors, their rage and disappointment rendered them inexorably furious; and Regulus died, as he expected, by the implacable hand of studied torment and lingering cruelty. 
 
 
 MISS FORRESTER. 
 Good Heavens! I pity his wife and children! 
 
 
 CHARLES. 
 I admire his resolution. 
 
 
 WILLIAM. 
 And I almost envy his fame. He will never be forgotten. I may die, and, perhaps, in a very little time, nobody will remember I ever lived. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 I approve your emulative spirit, William, but beware that it does not take an improper turn. 'Twere supreme happiness rather to sink into eternal oblivion, than to be remembered for our vices or our crimes. There is another thing, my children, which I wish you to remark; the patriotism of Regulus extended only to his own country; it was not that universal philanthropy which I am endeavouring to inculcate. The love of our country should make us freely devote our lives and fortunes
 
to protect it from the tyranny of ambitious magistrates, or the assaults of rival nations; but it should never instigate that partial and oppressive spirit, which lusts for dominion, and triumphs only to extirpate. The advice of Scipio Nassica was not only humane, but it was wise. Cato, the censor, and many other Roman senators were perpetually engaging the people to destroy Charthage. Scipio bade them beware of that pernicious counsel; "erase Carthage, said he, and where shall Rome find a rival? her military discipline must either become feeble by disuse, or be exercised to her own destruction." This prophecy was afterwards too fatally fulfilled. 
 
 
 WILLIAM. 
 Indeed, Sir, I think the destruction of Carthage reflects infamy on the Romans, instead of glory. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Ay, William, it is one among the many black and indelible spots in the annals of human nature. 
 I shall now, my children, introduce a patriot to you, superior even to Regulus, though never likely to be so celebrated; a poor Armenian, who beheld the wisdom, knowledge, and arts of the Europeans, and the comparative ignorance of his own country, with an anxiety of patriotism that raises him to the very first rank of men. But I will not attempt to give you the character of my hero; I am unequal
 
to the task; his own letters will do it more effectually than the eloquence of an angel. He was a foreigner, and there are consequently defects in his stile, which the intent and spirit of them will induce you to overlook. His first letter was addressed to the Earl, now Duke, of Northumberland, who patronized and recommended him to the late Duke of Cumberland, by whom he was sent to study in the academy at Woolwich; his second to Prince Heraclius, his sovereign. Now read them, William; and learn, my sons, endeavour, my children, to catch a portion of his divine spirit. 
 
 
 
 
 PATRIOTISM: Or the Letters of AMEEN, the Armenian. 
 
 LETTER I. 
 My Lord, 
 I present you the specimen of my writing I promised. It is too bold, I am afraid, to make myself the subject, when I write for your lordship; but forgive, my lord, the language of a stranger: I have been in too low condition to know how to write proper to your lordship; but you speak to me more kind and humble than mean people; so I am encouraged. I have very good designs, and I have suffered very much hardships for them. I think your lordship will not despise a person in a mean condition, for thinking of something more than livelihood; I have, with a good will, thrown behind me a very easy livelihood for this
 
condition, mean as it is; and I am not troubled if I can carry my point at last. As long as I can remember my own family, and I remember my great grandfathers, they have been always soldiers, and always did remember Christ, though they were torn out of their country of Armenia, by Shaw Abbas, and planted in Hamadan. After their captivity they were soldiers likewise. Two of my uncles did spill their blood in the service of Kouly Kan: my father was his slave for many years; but he was at last forced to fly into India, because this tyrant had sharpened his battle-ax against his own army more than upon his enemies. Soon after my father sent for me to Calcutta, in Bengal, where he is a merchant. There I saw the fort of Europeans, and the soldiers exercise, and the shipping, and that they were dexterous and perfect in all things. Then I grieved within myself for my religion and my country, that we were in slavery and ignorance, like Jews, vagabonds over the earth; and I spoke to my father upon all this; because our fathers did not fight for their country; but I understood that the Armenians in the mountains were free, and handled arms from their childhood; and that those under Patriarch, who are subject to the Turks and Persians, did not want courage; but they are all ignorant, and fight only with a wild and natural fierceness, and so they have no order, and do nothing but like robbers. And I resolved I would go to Europe to learn art military, and other sciences
 
to assist that art; and I was sure that if I could go into Armenia, like an European officer, I may be useful at last in some degree to my country; but my father did not listen to me, for God did not give him understanding in these things. I could not bear to live like a beast, eating and drinking, without liberty or knowledge: I went to captain Fox, of the ship Walpole, and kissed his feet hundred times, to let me work for my passage to Europe, before he Would bend to me; but he did at last admit me; and I came to England with much labour; but it did not grieve me when I thought of my country: I entered myself with my little money into Mr. Middleton's academy: I had the honour to tell your lordship so before: I was first a scholar, and, when my money was gone, I was a servant there for my learning; but he was broke, and I lost every thing. I went into the street to work for my bread, for I could not bear to go about wagging a tail at people's doors for a bit of meat. I will not grieve your lordship with the misery which I went through; I do not want to be pitied. I got service at last as a porter with one Mr. Robarts, a grocer in the city: in this time I carried sometimes burthens of near two hundred weight upon my back, and paid out of my wages to learn some geometry, and to compleat myself in writing, and just to begin a little French; but because, my lord, I almost starved myself to pay for this, and carried burthens more than my strength, I hurted myself so that I could not work any longer;
 
so that I was in despair, and not care what become of me: but a friend put me to write with one Mr. Webster, an attorney in Cheapside, which for a little time got bread; but I was resolved, in despair, to go again to India, because nobody would put out his hand to help me to learn; and my uncle sent 60 pounds to governor Davis to carry me back. I am afraid I am too troublesome in my accounts to your lordship; but we people of Asia cannot say little in a great deal, like scholars. Now I met by chance some gentlemen who encouraged me, and gave me books to read, and advised me to kiss colonel Dingley's hands, and shew my business to him. He was a brave soldier, took me by the hand, spoke to his own serjeant, an honest man, to teach me manual exercise, and gave me Bland's Military Discipline, and promised to help me to learn gunnery and fortification; but I was again unfortuned; for when light just began to come to my eyes, he died, and I was like before, except that I knew a little of manual exercise, and read some of the Roman history; could learn no more nor live. I was broke to pieces, and bowed my neck to governor Davis, to go over to my friends, without doing any of these things I suffered for. I am in this net at present; but I am happier than all mankind, if I can meet any great man who can prevail upon governor Davis to allow me something out of the money he has only upon condition that I return to blindness once again; that I may go through evolutions with the recruits, and learn
 
gunnery and fortification, and if there is war, to go one year as a volunteer. If governor Davis writes, that I have a great man here my protector, my father, who looks upon me as a person run away and forsaken, will make me an allowance to learn. If I could clear my own eyes, and serve my country and my religion, that is trod under the foot of Mussulman, I would go through all slavery and danger with a glad heart; but if I must return, after four years slavery and misery, to the same ignorance, without doing any good, would break my heart, my lord, in the end. I beg pardon, I have experience of your lordship's goodness, else I would not say so much; I would not receive, but return; and I want nothing but a little speaking from the authority of an Indian governor to my friends. I have always been honest. Those I have been slave to will say I am honest. Mr. Grey trusted me. 
 Here is a sort of story nothing but your lordship's good nature can make tolerable. I am much obliged to your lordship for your patience. I shall be very proud of giving your lordship all the proof in my power, how much I am, &c. 
 JOSEPH AMEEN. 
 
 
 
 LETTER II. To the most shining, most christian, King HERACLIUS, of Georgia and Armenia. 
 My King, 
 ALL things that have been made, from the beginning of the world to this day, are by the will of God, according to the New Testament. All things were made by Him; and without Him was not any thing made that was made. God created the heaven and the earth, the sea and the land; and it is He that made you king over two nations, Armenians and Georgians. Glory be to God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that made you defender and protector of those Christian nations, and of their faith, who have been many hundred years under the hands of Persian unbelievers; and being now delivered by the mighty hands of your majesty, the same God will also, I hope, deliver those Christians, who are under the hands of Othomans; for there is no difficulty in the mighty hands of God; and whosoever trust in Him, shall not be ashamed. It was He that delivered Israel, by the hand of the prophet Moses, out of the hands of Pharaoh, and fed them with manna, according to the holy Psalms, which faith, Men did eat the bread of angels. May the same God preserve and strengthen the wrist of your majesty, to defend us from the encroachment of barbarians! Amen. 
 Again, having heard the same of your majesty's brave conquest, by which you have possessed the two ancient kingdoms of Armenia and Georgia, and that they are at present under your majesty's protection, being desirous, from the readiness of my soul, to offer your majesty my service, which I hope you will make no difficulty to accept, as money is far from the desire of your majesty's servant, who wishes nothing but to serve him who has the rule over his nation; for, while I am here, I want nothing: I have a great friend here, and that great friend is my protector; and that protector is the son of the king of England. If it please your majesty to instruct me of your will and pleasure, that I may petition to this great prince, in order to obtain leave to co nd to serve you as an European officer, according to my low abilities; and that I may teach your soldiers to fight like Europeans, who are very well known to your majesty, that with a few men they overcome many. 
 Your majesty has heard of the German nation, who, with no more than twenty thousand men, are able to give battle to a hundred thousand Mahometans, or Turks, enemies to the Christian nations. I would also acquaint your majesty, how it is, or by what means, that the European nations are such conquerors, and so brave warriors. It is a rule among them, that whoever is desirous to become a warrior, first, he is obliged to enter himself into the house of exercise, which they call it
 
here, an academy to learn or to study, four or five years, the art of war, that is to say, to learn the art of building strong castles, the like of which are not to be found in all Asia; and also the art of managing great guns in such a manner, as none of our fortifications could stand before them for three days; likewise, the manner of encamping with judgment, and the way of ranging of the soldiers, so that they are like a wall of iron, not to be broken; and, after having thoroughly compleated his study in that art, leaves the place, goes and offers himself and his service to his prince or king, thereby becomes an officer, or fighter for his king and country; and by long experience perfects himself in that great art; for the art of war here is not to be understood easily; it contains many things difficult to be known, and very much preferable to the practice of Turks and Persians. See, O mighty king, it is not by strength of arm, that these nations are called conquerors, but by wisdom and art. Here every thing is by art and wisdom; for without wisdom the land is not land; and the nations that dwell therein are blind and unhappy. According to the Old Testament, which faith, God made the heaven and the earth by his infinite wisdom; therefore God loveth wisdom for this reason. I say, whosoever followeth wisdom, he is dear, or beloved of God; for from wisdom proceedeth all manner of goodness; also, a man is not mighty without wisdom, nor wise without righteousness. The ancient Romans, who were
 
so great, gave laws, and subdued all nations of the world: this was by art and wisdom, before our Saviour, although they were heathens and idolaters; but they were virtuous, and lived in good morals. Another example, Peter the Great, of Russia, who could not be so great a warrior, and his country could never have been so blessed, and flourished, had not he come over here to learn wisdom, who, when he was in Holland, served in a place of ship-building, like one of the labourers, and humbled himself therein: whosoever humbleth himself shall be exalted, &c. And when he returned into his own country, he was full of all manner of wisdom, by which he made himself father, as well as lord and king, over his country. These are things which have made the people of Europe to be conquerors, and to be esteemed more wise than all the nations upon the face of the earth; for amongst them are learned men, who study the way in which God has made all things according to their nature, by which they are able to do things of great wonder and usefulness. They send likewise into every part of the world, at a great expence, for to learn all things that are produced upon or under the earth, by which they are increased in wisdom and riches; their cities are very great, their people are very happy, not being afraid of famine or dangers, and they are under excellent laws, by which no man is suffered to do wrong to another, though he is weak or poor. But this nation, this great and mighty nation, O my
 
king! where I live, is not only a great and wise nation, but also destroyers of the devourers of mankind. I am surprised to see, that even the sheep in this country rest in quietness without the least fear of wolves. May the great God grant your majesty's subjects to follow their examples, to grow wise and conquerors, under the wisdom and courage of your majesty, to whom God grant long life, to trample your enemies like dust under your feet. 
 May it please your majesty to know who your servant is, that raises his head to speak to you, and takes pains to know these things with much labour, for your majesty's service, to whom God grant victory. The name of your servant is Emin, the son of Joseph, the son of Michael, the son of Gregory, who is descended from Emin, who, in the day when Armenia was broke under the battle-axe of Shaw Abbas, was Minbashy in his country; but he was made captive, with others, and was carried into Persia, and placed at Hamadan; from him your majesty's servant is come, and he is called of his name, being born at Hamadan; but our captivity was grievous under the Persians, who, since Mahometanism, which is well known to your majesty, are grown quite barbarians, not being so civilized as they were in antient times, (according to the histories I have read in this blessed island) so that my father flew from Hamadan, in the time of Shaw Thamas Kouly Kan, into India, to a place called Calcutta, where the English have a fort, and soldiers,
 
and a great trade, though their country is seven months voyage from Bengal; there my father made himself a merchant to this day; and would have made me such as himself, but I did not submit to him; for I enquired of my fathers from my infancy, the reason why we were persecuted by infidels? and why we did reside so contemptibly amongst lawless nations? but they made me no answer, and my heart was grieved, and I had none to comfort me in my griefs; for I said, the ants that creep upon the earth have a king, and we have not; and the nations of all countries make their laugh upon us, also persecuting, saying to us, that you are master-less; you have no king of your own, and that you resemble the Jews scattered upon the face of the earth; you have no love for one another; you are without honour; and by the disunity of your nation, all the nations insult you; you are contemptible, and without zeal; and you are as great lovers of money, as the heathens did love their gods. I could not bear all these reflections, whilst I grieved, and found none to heal me. I observed watchfully the Europeans, their wise customs, and their shipping, far better both for sailing and for war, than the ships of the Indians; and above all, the practice of their soldiers, who, if they were thousands of men, by one word of command from their officers, instantly all together move and act, as if they were one man. Then I thought in my mind, that it was God that had put it in my heart to think on all
 
things. Therefore, I spoke not to my father, but had hopes in my heart, that if I went to England, I should learn the art of war, and I was encouraged, for I then heard a little, and not much of your majesty's name, until I came here, where I learned that your majesty was established in your kingdom, and had routed a great army of Persians. See! O my king, what great thing the wisdom is, by which this nation know our country better than we do; and that this nation are awake, and we are asleep. On board the ship I worked like a sailor; and afterwards, when I came here, was so reduced, that I was forced by hunger, to offer myself to sale upon the Exchange, to be sent into the new world. Oh! my king, do not pity Me; no, not even at that time when you hear, or see me sacrificed in your service, but pity those servants of Christ, who deserve pity; but the omnipotent God saved me by the hands of an Englishman; and the same God who heard the crying of my heart, did put it into the heart of a generous nobleman, who is one of the pillars of the throne of England, to assist me. He made me right in the counsel of my heart; he made me known to the son of the king of England; he sent me to the place of education, where I learnt the art of war, according to wisdom. 
 My ambition is to lay my knowledge at the feet of your majesty, and to serve you in the best of my ability. For know, O my king, that what is not built on knowledge, though it is very strong and
 
lofty, is as if it were built upon sand; therefore, my purpose is, to go well instructed into your majesty's service, and to carry with me men skilful in all things, (if you give me encouragement,) to strengthen and polish your kingdom, like the kingdoms of Europe: for you have a good country, and command over many brave men; and if you could gather the Armenians, a rich and trading people, who are scattered to the east, and the west, and the north, and the south, under the protection of your majesty's arms in your own country, no kingdom in the east would be like your kingdom, for riches and glory. May the eternal God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, sharpen your scymitar upon all your enemies, and strengthen the wrist of your majesty's right hand, to protect our distressed nation, according to the wishes and labours of your servant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 NANCY. 
 I declare I find myself exceedingly interested in this poor man's fate. Did he succeed, sir? Did he contribute to enlighten his nation, and to spread that knowledge which he had suffered such hardships to acquire? 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 I don't know, my dear; I wish I could inform you. I would give any thing to know the success of his labours. Alas! I am afraid he would find but few of his countrymen actuated by the same disinterested and patriotic spirit. 
 
 
 
 CHARLES. 
 And did he write those letters himself, sir? 
 
 
 WILLIAM. 
 Yes, brother; you see here in a note, that the letter to the Duke of Northumberland is printed from the original in Ameen's own hand-writing, the character remarkably fair, and even mercantile, and the other is translated from the Armenian. 
 
 
 
 DIALOGUE X. 
 
 MR. EGERTON ( To Mrs. Egerton. ) 
 WE will now, my dear, return, if you please, to the subject you proposed, and read the account of Mrs. Louisa Darbach, or rather Louisa Karsch, for that is her name by her last husband, and the one by which she is known among the literati of Germany. 
 
 
 MRS. EGERTON. 
 With all my heart, my dear; and I think it a-propos, as there seems to be some affinity between your poor Armenian and Madam Darbach. They
 
both possessed a perseverance which no difficulties could overcome; both were superior geniuses, and both were protected and patronized by the great, and they both deserved patronage. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Yes, yes; a writer like our friend Plutarch would draw a number of parallel circumstances. When I intended to introduce this subject to you, my children, I purposed to inform you of the great estimation, in which learning and learned men have ever been held, and this I shall now resume. As a spur to your industry in this particular, I must inform such of you as have not made the observation yourselves, that to be illiterate now among people of a certain rank, is to be despised. I would by no means persuade you to become writers, unless you feel an irresistible impulse, and find that those whose judgment is established approve your efforts, and encourage you to proceed. Then, if with energy and genius you can by your writings warm the heart, and incite it to virtue, I know no character more useful, more respectable, or which I would rather see you assume. But this is a difficult task, and only to be accomplished by a few. 
 The just renown which has been acquired by the exertions of genius, affords a pleasing retrospect to the emulative mind. Barbarians, kings, and conquerors, have given the most honourable testimonies of respect to learning. "I dwelt, faith Martinius,
 
in the city of Venxus, when it was sacked by the Tartars. I fixed over the fairest gate of my house a red paper, long and broad, with an inscription, signifying, HERE DWELLS THE EUROPEAN DOCTOR OF THE DIVINE LAW. At the entrance of the great hall I placed my largest and best bound books, my mathematical and optical instruments, &c. by which means I not only escaped the violence and plunder of the common soldiers, but was caressed by the Tartarian viceroy." 
 When Alexander the Great found among the spoils of Darius a casket of inestimable workmanship, embellished with gold, pearls, and precious stones, he kept it as a case for the works of Homer. 
 When Menander, the comic poet, travelled between Egypt and Macedon, he was attended by ambassadors and a fleet, the kings of these places thinking they could never do him sufficient honour. 
 Magdalene, wife of Lewis XI. of France, when she saw Alanus fast asleep, who was an old hard-favoured, but learned man, she approached softly and kissed him. The ladies that attended her laughed, but she replied, "It is not his person I bear this reverence and respect to, but the divine beauty of his soul." 
 These kind of instances, my children, are almost innumerable: however, I shall only cite another, and that, because it contains a pathetic description of the death of a most extraordinary and celebrated man. This was Archimedes, the mathematician,
 
who by the profundity of his knowledge, and the inexhaustible resources of his imagination, defended the ill-fortified city of Syracuse against a most powerful fleet and army. This city was deemed indefensible, and its riches were known to be immense; the Romans sat down before it, therefore, with the expectation of a speedy surrender and prodigious plunder. Archimedes alone suspended its fate. He destroyed their men: he demolished their shipping. He so united the powers of mechanism, that he raised their vessels into the air, and then let them dash to pieces by the violence of their fall. He made use of burning-glasses, which, at the distance of some hundred yards, set the Roman ships and wooden towers on fire. At last, however, the town was taken, on a great festival, by surprize, and the inhabitants put to the sword. Previous to the saccage, Marcellus, the Roman general, had given strict orders to spare Archimedes, but cruel and inexorable destiny had otherwise decreed. A Roman soldier had broke into his house, with his sword drawn, and demanded who he was. Archimedes, intent probably upon some new discovery, and anxious to preserve a mathematical figure, which he had drawn in the dust, instead of answering the soldier's question, called out to him not to spoil his circle. The warrior understood not circles; he thought himself scorned, and ran Archimedes thro' the body! 
 Let us now return to Louisa Darbach. 
 
 
 
 
 
 EMULATION. An Account of Madam LOUISA DARBACH, a famous German Poetess. 
 THIS prodigy in the literary world was born in the year 1722, upon the borders of Lower Silesia, between Zulichau and Crossen, at a small hamlet called Nammer. Her father, being a brewer and alehouse-keeper, was the principal of seven poor inhabitants, but died whilst she was still a child, not above seven years old. Her grandmother's brother, an old man of good understanding, who lived in Poland, had taken her home to his house a few months before this happened, and taught her to read and write. This is the uncle to whom one of the poems in the printed collection is addressed. She continued with him about three years, and then returned to her mother. The misfortunes which constantly attended her, until she was near forty, began at this period. Her first employment was the care of her infant brother; but she soon quitted that, in order to attend upon three cows, which was her parent's whole stock. The first signs of her natural inclination to poetry had then just made their appearance, by an uncommon desire to sing. She knew a hundred church hymns by heart, and sung them at her work, or whilst watching the cattle. Her inclination soon prompted her to write verses,
 
but she does not at present recollect any part of that first essay of her uncultivated genius, which was accidentally assisted by a neighbouring shepherd, who, although separated by a small river, continued nevertheless to lend her a few books. Robinson Crusoe, the Asiatic Banise, a German romance, and the Arabian Nights Entertainment, composed the whole of her library. She read these with great pleasure, and her time passed away very agreeably. But this happiness was soon at an end, being obliged to return to her former attendance upon children; with which, and other laborious employments of a servant, she reached her seventeenth year. Her next step was matrimony; and the husband her mother provided her, being a wool-comber by profession, obliged her to prepare all the wool which he used; besides which she had the whole business of the house to manage, and could find no time to indulge her natural propensity to writing verses and reading, except a few hours on a Sunday, but took that opportunity to write down the poems she had composed at her work. After having been married nine years, she was released from this drudgery by the death of her husband; but her mother soon engaged her to another, who was much worse than the former. This was the most unfortunate part of her whole life, as she felt with this second husband all the hardships of an unhappy marriage, and great poverty. But even in these circumstances nature had a surprizing influence over the genius of our
 
poetess. She got to the sight of some poems written by a clergyman, named Schonemann, who is well known at Berlin to have been at times affected, after a violent fever, with a sort of madness, during which he always spoke and preached in verse: although the bulk of this extraordinary man's performances rather indicated a disordered imagination, than the inspiration of the Muses; our poetess found nevertheless in those she saw something which greatly excited her genius. 
 She now became more desirous than ever to follow the natural bent of her disposition, but wanted both time and opportunity: she was, however, at last encouraged by several persons to proceed, and particularly by Professor Meyer, of Halle, who was no otherwise acquainted with her, than by having seen one of her poems. In gratitude to her first patrons and benefactors, who were chiefly inhabitants of Transtadt, in Poland, the place where she then resided, she mentions their names in the preface. M. Korber, of Great Lissa, was the first who committed any of her performances to the press. These productions of her genius were only small sparks of that half-extinguished fire, which the Muses had kindled in her. The King of Prussia's victories gave her force to overcome all obstacles, and the flames which had till then been smothered, blazed out at once. She removed to Great Glogau in the year 1755, with her husband and children, and gaining admittance to a bookseller's
 
shop, read many poetical and other performances with much pleasure, but without any order or settled plan. The use Mrs. Darbach has made of this cursory reading, and how easily she retained the most material parts, appear throughout her poems. She has only read a few books, and those with great expedition; but any person unacquainted with the real fact, would naturally imagine the contrary. The remarkable war which ended in 1764, and her sovereign's exploits, displayed at large the poetical genius of this extraordinary person. The battle of Lowoschutz gave occasion to her first triumphant ode; and she soon afterwards perused the military songs of a Prussian grenadier, some of Ramler's odes, and Mrs. Unzer's poems. Her subsequent productions on the occasion of the King of Prussia's victories, plainly shew the effect they had upon her, and are proofs of a poetical genius already come to maturity. Our poetess continued still, however, oppressed with poverty; but Providence was pleased at last to release her from her very deplorable state, under which few would have been able to have supported themselves. Baron Cottwitz, a Silesian nobleman, who has long been celebrated for many amiable qualifications, became acquainted with her in 1760, as he was travelling through Glogau. His charitable disposition pitied her distress, relieved her from it, and carried her to Berlin. She soon became acquainted with several men of learning, and judges of poetry: her genius then
 
shewed itself in the greatest lustre; she was universally admired; and it is now her happiness to be caressed at the court of a prince, whose characteristic it is, to be at once the judge and patron of genius. Most of the poems in the present collection have been composed since, and fully explain her character, and the latter occurrences of her life. To the above account, it may not be improper to add a few remarks concerning Madam Darbach's genius, made by the editor in the preface to the collection of her poems, from whence our narrative is taken, and likewise a specimen of the poems themselves, to illustrate these remarks. 
 Plato, in his discourse called Io, lays it down as the character of a true poet, that he delivers his thoughts by inspiration, himself not knowing the expressions he is to make use of. According to him, the harmony and turn of the verse produce in the poet an enthusiasm, which furnishes him with such thoughts and images, as in a more composed hour he would have sought for in vain; who, without design, without art, and without instruction, is arrived at a wonderful perfection in the art of poetry, and may be placed among poets of the first class. It is from this cause she has been more successful in such pieces as she has written whilst her imagination was warm, than in those that she has composed coolly, deliberately, and in leisure hours. The latter always bear some marks of art, and betray the absence of the Muses. Whenever our authoress is
 
in a particular manner struck by any object, either in her solitary hours, or when she is in company, her spirits immediately catch the flame; she has no longer the command of herself; every spring of her soul is in motion; she feels an irresistible impulse to compose, and with an amazing quickness commits the thoughts to paper, which the Muse inspires her with; and, like a watch just wound up, as soon as her soul is put into motion by the impression the object has made on her, she expresses herself in poetry, without knowing in what manner the ideas and figures rise in her mind. Another and more nice observation of Plato is, that the harmony and turn of the verse keep up the inspiration. Of this truth likewise our authoress is a living instance. No sooner hath she hit upon the tone, as she calls it, and the foot of the verse, but the words go on fluently, and she is never at a loss for thought or imagery. The most delicate turns of the subject and expression arise in her mind while she is yet writing, as if they were dictated to her. Of her extempore performances, we have an excellent specimen in that beautiful ode sacred to the memory of her deceased uncle, the instructor of her infancy, written in the year 1761, at a time when she happened to be engaged in company of the first rank at Berlin. It consists of eight stanzas, of six lines each, of which the third and sixth have nine syllables, the other ten. It seems while she was in this select company, she was touched by a sudden reflection,
 
with a keen sense of the great difference between her present condition, and her situation in the early part of her life; and of the great obligation she had been under to the good old man, who, by his attention to her understanding, had laid the foundation of her present happiness. Overcome with a sense of this happiness, and with a heart replete with gratitude, she could contain herself no longer, but, before all the company, poured forth the over-flowings of her soul (it must have been a very affecting scene) nearly in the following words: 
 "Arise from the dust, ye bones that rest in the land where I passed my infant years. Venerable sage, re-animate thy body. Ye lips that once fed me with the honey of instruction, be eloquent." 
 "Oh thou bright shade, look down upon me from the top of Olympus: behold, I am no longer following the cattle in the fields: observe the circle of refined mortals that surround me; they all speak of thy niece's poems: Oh listen to their conversation!" 
 "For ever flourish the bread lime, under whose shade I was wont to cling round thy neck full of tenderness, like a child to the best of fathers, whilst thou wert reposing thyself on the mossy seat, tired as the reaper with the fatigues of a sultry day!" 
 "Under yon green arched roof I used to repeat to thee twenty passages in praise of God supreme, though they were much above my comprehension; and when I asked thee the meaning of many a dark
 
sentence in the Christian sacred records, good man, thou didst explain them to me." 
 "Like a divine in sable vest, who from the lofty pulpit points out the way that leads to life; so thou didst inform me of the fall of man and the covenant of grace, and I, all raptures, snatched the words from thy lips with eager kisses." 
 "Thou inhabitant of some celestial sphere, behold the silent tear of joy! may it often roll down my cheeks! If thou canst speak, dear shade, tell me, didst thou ever conceive any hopes of my present fortune and honour, at the time when my eyes were successively engaged in the reading of books every day more improving?" 
 "When at thy side, on some rosy bank, I sat weaving into chaplets for thy temples the flowers my little hands had gathered, and looking up to thee smiled filial love, did thy soul then presage the good things that are now come to pass?" 
 "Mayest thou be cloathed with threefold radiance, and mayest thou be refreshed with the emanations of divine complacence more than the souls of thy companions. May every drop of temporal pleasure with which my cup of joy overflows, be rewarded unto thee with continual draughts from the ocean of eternal beatitude!" 
 
 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Well, children, what is your opinion of Madam Louisa Darbach? 
 
 
 
 MR. WILLIAM. 
 I think her a prodigy, sir. 
 
 
 NANCY. 
 And so I believe we all do. For my part, though I have so many instructors, and am taken so much pains with, I am afraid I shall never be half so great a genius. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Nay, but, my dear, you should never encourage that kind of idea. Neither do I mean you should be vain. You should not arrogantly say, you see nothing extraordinary in such a person: I would have you admire, but not despond. While you wonder you should say, 'I will likewise endeavour to become famous by my virtues and my talents; I will emulate what I find every body approves.' 
 
 
 FANNY. 
 Yes; but, papa, as far as I find by this, one can't be a poetess unless one has a Muse: now I don't know what that is; I never saw one in my life that I know of, nor do I know where one can get such a thing Lord, mamma, what makes you all laugh at me so? 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 We laugh, my dear, more at the writer who has led you into this error, than at you. The Muse which he talks so familiarly of, as if it were a real
 
personage standing at Madam Darbach's elbow, and telling her what to say next, is an imaginary lady that never had any existence. The expression, however, is become very common, though it is very inaccurate. It only signifies, that the person thus assisted by what is called the Muse or Muses, has a more lively fancy, with greater feelings and facility of composition, than others. 
 
 
 MR. CHARLES. 
 I have heard you say, sir, when you have been speaking of French poetry and French critics, that notwithstanding they are continually talking so much about nature, truth, and probability, their tragedies and comedies are exceedingly improbable and unnatural, because they make their characters speak extempore in rhime, but from this account of Mrs. Darbach she has that power. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Yes, Charles; but these is one thing I must guard you against, which is, that there is a natural propensity in man, when he is speaking of any thing uncommon, to exaggerate, rather than to simply relate facts. I cannot assert that it is so in this instance; but if Mrs. Darbach felt the inspiration she speaks of, that is, if in the midst of a large company she was sensible of no restraint, but was able to burst forth all at once into a strain of extempore poetry, connected in the subject, and regular in the
 
composition, her talents are indeed miraculous. There are extempore poets among the Italians, the Spaniards, and other nations, whose language is smooth, and where almost every word ends with a vowel: but the compositions of the very best of these, from every account I have heard, would be very dull and insignificant, if committed to writing. The German tongue, like the English, is bold, irregular, abounding with consonants, and requiring great art and nicety, before it can be adapted to the purposes of poetry, so as to give pleasure. I can readily suppose the imagination peculiarly warm at some moments, teeming with imagery, and overflowing with words and ideas; but the instant you lay it under the restraint of certain rules, intricate and severe in their own nature, you disturb its connexions, by dividing its attention. And as to the pretended inspiration spoken of, I think it a chimaera: I mean, that inspiration which seems to insinuate a poet can make beautiful verses in a kind of dream, and without knowing what he is doing. I speak this, children, that you may not be discouraged by comparisons: that you may not conclude you want abilities, because you find them unequal to miracles. However, I would recommend Mrs. Darbach to you, as a very noble example of Emulation. 
 
 
 MRS. EGERTON. 
 We will now leave this amiable woman, and reverse the picture; for as we wish, my children, to
 
shew you the honours that are paid to abilities, when virtuously exerted; so likewise it is incumbent on us to describe the melancholy catastrophe of the vicious. It is true, there are instances, too many perhaps, of wicked people, who apparently flourish while they live, and have the happiness to be forgotten when they are dead: but only imagine, my children, what must the feelings of those people be, whose only hope is that men may not discover their crimes at the present, and that their memories may sink into oblivion in future! Consider this, and consider the calm thoughts, the sweet content, and the delightful retrospect of the good, the homage that is paid to them both living and dead, with the certain assurance of having every thing to hope, and nothing to fear; consider these things, and you cannot help being virtuous. But come, let us hear the history of Bianca. 
 
 
 
 
 PRIDE. The extraordinary History of BIANCA, a Venetian Lady, from the French of M. DE LA LANDE. 
 ABOUT the end of the fifteenth century, Thomas Buona Venturi, a young man of Florence, of a creditable family, but without fortune, went to live with a merchant of the same country, who had settled at Venice. The merchant's house was over-against the back-door of one that belonged to
 
a noble Venetian, whose name was Barthelemi Capello. In the house of Capello there was a young lady of great beauty, whose name was Bianca. She was watched with great circumspection, but Buona Venturi frequently saw her at the window. He had not the least hope of an interview, yet by a natural, and almost necessary impulse, he did all that could be done in such circumstances, to amuse her, and expressed the passion with which she had inspired him. He was young and amiable; she very soon ceased to be indifferent; and after long negociation, the particulars of which are not related, the lovers found means to accomplish their wishes. Bianca went every night after the family were retired and asleep, to the chamber of Buona Venturi, in the merchant's house, by means of the little back-door, which she left a-jar, and by which she returned before day, without being seen by any body. After this had continued some time, custom made her less cautious, and one night she staid with her lover till the morning was farther advanced than usual: it happened that a baker's boy, who, according to the custom of the country, was taking bread from a neighbouring house to carry it to the oven, perceived the little back-door by which Bianca had come out, to be a-jar, and supposing it to be left open by accident, shut it. The young lady came a few minutes afterwards, and found it fast; in the consternation and distress which this accident produced, she returned to the house she had just quitted, and knocking softly
 
at the door, was let in by her lover. Gratitude and love instantly determined him to sacrifice every thing to her safety; he immediately quitted his situation, and retired with the lady to the house of another Florentine, where they remained hidden with the utmost care and precaution, till they found an opportunity of escaping to Florence. At Florence he had a little house in Via Larga, near St. Mark's, and over-against a convent of nuns, of the order of St. Catherine. To this little dwelling he retired with his wife, and lived some time in great privacy, for fear the republic of Venice should, at the solicitations of Capello, cause him to be pursued. Francis Maria, the great duke of Tuscany at this time, was a native of France, the son of Cosmo the First, and father of Mary de Medicis. He had married Jane of Austria, daughter of the emperor Ferdinand, and widow of the king of Hungary. She was a princess of high estimation, but being at this time past her youth, the duke neglected her for other women. One of the officers of his court was the confident of his pleasures, who had a wife not less zealous to render herself useful than himself. The arrival of the fair Venetian was known at Florence, and the rumour of her adventure and her beauty, excited a strong desire in the Duke to see her, to which the great privacy of her life contributed not a little. He used every day to walk before the house to which she had retired, and as she had no amusement but looking out of the window, it was not long before his
 
curiosity was gratified. She was indeed half veiled, but he saw enough to judge of her beauty, of which he became violently enamoured. His confidante perceiving his passion to be unsurmountable, began to concert measures for the gratification of it, and engaged his wife to assist in the project. The misfortunes which Bianca had already suffered, and those to which she was still exposed, gave this good woman a pretence to insinuate that she had something of importance to communicate to her, and for that purpose invited her to dinner. Buona Venturi was some time in suspence whether he should suffer Bianca to accept the invitation; but the rank of the lady, and the need in which he stood of protection, at length got the better of his caution and doubts. Bianca was received with the most flattering kindness and attention; was prevailed upon to relate the story of her distress, and was heard with an appearance of the most tender concern; obliging offers were made her, and pressed with so generous a friendship, that she could not refuse to accept of some presents from the lady. The duke, informed of the success of the first visit, hoped that he might be present at the second. Another invitation was immediately sent to Bianca, and after new marks of esteem and regard, new pity of her misfortunes, and new praises of her beauty, she was asked if she had no desire to make her court to the grand duke, who, on his part, was impatient to become acquainted with her, having already found an opportunity to see
 
and admire her. Bianca had not fortitude and virtue to resist this new honour, which, though she at first affected to refuse, her crafty seducer discovered, by her eyes, that she wished to be urged to accept. Just at this crisis it was contrived that the grand duke should come in, without any appearance of design; and Bianca was charmed with the modesty of his address, the warmth of his praise, and the liberality of his offers. Other visits succeeded, and a familiarity insensibly came on; some presents which she could not refuse from her sovereign, improved the duke's advantage; and the husband himself did not think it prudent to break a connexion which might be at once innocent and advantageous. The duke was not likely to stop short in so good a road; he gained new influence over the wife by advancing the husband, and at last accomplished his wishes so much to the satisfaction of all parties, that, as the Italians express it, he and Bianca and Buona Venturi, made a triangulo equilatero. The husband soon became familiar with his new condition, and removed with his wife to a house in the fine street that leads to a bridge over the Arno, called Trinity Bridge. This house is still standing; it is distinguished by the arms of Medicis surmounted by a hat, and belongs at present to the Ricardi family. Buona Venturi solaced himself for the loss of Bianca, by forming new connexions, and associated with the nobility of the country; but a change of fortune so sudden, and so great, rendered him insolent, overbearing,
 
and presumptuous even in his behaviour to the duke himself, and created him so many enemies that he was at length assasinated near the bridge that led to his house. The duke and his new mistress were not much afflicted at this accident. She totally lost her reserve and timidity, and appeared in public with a magnificent equipage, setting honour and shame at defiance. Jane, the grand dutchess, was extremely mortified at the conduct of her husband, and provoked by the pride of her rival, yet she suppressed both her grief and resentment, which, however, secretly subverted her constitution, and at length put an end to her life. The death of the grand dutchess opened new views to the ambition of Bianca, who had acquired an ascendancy over the Duke, which rendered him wholly subservient to her will, and she now exerted all her art to induce him to marry her. The cardinal Ferdinand de Medicis, who was next heir to the dukedom if his brother should die without issue, opposed this marriage in vain, and Bianca, in a short time was made grand dutchess of Tuscany. After some time she became very desirous of a child who might succeed the grand duke in his dominions; she caused masses to be said, and astrologers to be consulted, but these, and many other expedients proving ineffectual, she resolved to feign a pregnancy, and introduce a spurious child, of which she would at least have the honour. To assist her in the execution of this project, she applied to a cordelier of the monastery of Ogni Sancti, who
 
readily undertaking the affair, she feigned transient sickness, nauseas, and other symptoms of pregnancy; took to her bed, received the compliments of the court, and the duke himself expressed great satisfaction upon so happy an event. Her pretended reckoning being up, she suddenly alarmed her people in the middle of the night, complained of labour pains, and enquired impatiently for her confessor. The cardinal, who suspected the artifices of his sister-in-law, had her so diligently watched, that he knew all her motions; as soon as he was informed that her confessor was sent for, he repaired to her anti-chamber, in which he walked to and fro, repeating his breviary. The dutchess hearing he was there, sent him a message, intreating that he would retire, because she could not bear that he should hear the cries which might be forced from her by her pains. The cardinal answered, "let her highness think only of her own business as I do of mine." As soon as the confessor arrived, the cardinal ran to him, crying out, "welcome, welcome, my dear father, the grand dutchess is in labour, and has great need of your assistance;" at the same time catching him in his arms, and embracing him, he perceived a jolly boy, just born, which the good father had got in his sleeve. He instantly took the child from him, and cried out loud enough to be heard by the dutchess, "God be praised, the princess is happily delivered of a son;" at the same time shewing him to all that were present. The grand dutchess, enraged almost
 
to distraction at this insult and disappointment, determined to be revenged on the cardinal, and the grand duke, whose passion had suffered no abatement, soon gave her an opportunity. They were all three on a country party, at Poggio a' Caino, and eat at the same table. The cardinal was extremely fond of blanc-manger, and the dutchess procured some that was mixed with poison, and had it served up. The cardinal, who had many spies about her, was informed of it. He sat down at table, however, as usual, but notwithstanding the most pressing solicitations of the dutchess, he would not touch the blanc-manger. "Well, said the Duke, if the cardinal will not eat, I will;" and immediately took some into his plate. The dutchess not being able to prevent his eating it without discovering her crime, perceived herself to be undone for ever; and to avoid the resentment of her brother-in-law, the cardinal, she ate the remainder of the poisoned dish herself, and died with her husband. 
 
 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 So died a grand dutchess, truly deserving the miserable catastrophe her crimes involved her in. Compare, my children, this wretched lady's conduct with that of the countess of Alberti, Louisa Darbach, or a thousand other women, conspicuous for their virtues, and behold the difference. Imagine
 
the coroding passions, doubts, jealousies, and anxieties of the one, and the calm content and secret happiness of the other, and you will, none of you, ever indulge the least inclination to vice. 
 
 
 MRS. EGERTON. 
 I have so good an opinion of you all, my children, that I think I scarce need point out to you the errors of this unhappy woman's conduct. Had she not indulged her first irregular desires, her life might have been innocent, and her end happy. 
 
 
 END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 
 
 
 THE FAMILY PICTURE. 
 
 DIALOGUE XI. 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 IN our last conversation we had the history of an ambitious woman. Let us resume the subject; let us cursorily examine the passion of ambition. 
 The word Ambition, like the word pride, may be taken both in an ill and a good meaning. It is usually applied to those destructive actions which are inspired by a love of fame, regardless of the means; which root out the nations, and desolate the earth, that the people who remain may tremble and admire. When it takes this course, ambition is the most pernicious of all the passions; because the miseries with which it teems are supposed glorious and beneficial to the conquerors; who, therefore, never neglect to praise, and almost idolize him who leads them to victory. The leader fails not to return
 
this false praise he is the first of heroes, and they are the bravest of troops. Thus each is dilated with imaginary virtues, for actions the most oppressive, the most intolerable, and the most wicked that man can commit. 
 If you wish for a lively picture of the effects of this passion, and the horrors I have just hinted at, turn to the history of Sylla and Caius Marius, or, indeed, to the history of any great and powerful people, and you will soon be satiated. 
 Ambition is the most active principle in the mind, and its effects are frequently prodigious: Many persons have wilfully devoted their lives to it, by committing crimes for which they knew they should suffer; chusing rather to endure tortures, and have their names recorded in infamy, than to die and be forgotten. Such were Erostratus, who fired the Temple of Diana, at Ephesus; Hermoxles, who killed Philip, King of Macedon; and many others. 
 Numerous are the examples too of those who, inspired by this passion, have been inclined to obtain it by virtuous means, but who could not resist vicious opportunities of gaining their purposes. Julius Caesar, Pompey, Alexander, Pisistratus, &c. &c. gave, at different times, evident proofs of their sense of, and respect for, virtue. They committed likewise the most horrible crimes and devastations in pursuit of glory. 
 The love of fame seems never to have been more predominant in any person than in Alexander the
 
Great. He took Calisthenes, a man famous for his eloquent writings, with him to his wars, that he might be a witness of his actions, and record them for posterity. When he came to the tomb of Achilles, at Sigaeum, he exclaimed, "Oh fortunate hero, thou hadst a Homer to make thy praise immortal!" So lively was his own sense of this passion, that he could not forbear esteeming it in others. He had heard of a certain Indian, whose skill in archery was so great, that he could shoot his arrows through a ring at a great distance. This man was taken prisoner, and brought to Alexander, who desired him to exhibit some proofs of his dexterity; this the Indian peremptorily refused: at which Alexander was so enraged, that he commanded him to be taken away and slain. Being questioned by the soldiers, as they were leading him to death, concerning the reason of his obstinacy, the Indian told them, he had been long out of practice, and was afraid he should not be able to equal his former exploits. Alexander immediately ordered him to be released, gave him his liberty, and loaded him with presents: admiring the greatness of that spirit that would suffer death rather than lose renown. 
 The word ambition, when applied to a good intention, we usually call emulation; a word too cold to express actions eminently virtuous. The following tale will fully explain what I would have you understand by Ambition in each sense of the word. 
 
 
 
 
 
 AMBITION. KOREM and ZENDAR: A Tartarian Tale. 
 CORDUBA, King of Teran, in Great Tartary, was a Prince adored by his subjects, whose felicity he constantly laboured to promote, during a very long reign. Covered with glory, and bending under the infirmities of old age, his care was to fix upon a successor, who should cause him to be the less regretted by his people. It was his prerogative to elect one: and, having no son, he was obliged, according to the law of Tartary, to commit the sceptre to him whom he should chuse to marry his daughter, provided he were of the blood of Tamerlane. 
 Akebar, King of Balk, and Mameluke, Sultan of Carism, pretended, with equal ardor, to a match that would double their respective powers; and, presuming that Corduba would declare in favour of him whose enmity was most to be dreaded, each of them threatened to appear at the head of an army, to make good, at Teran, his demand for Almanzaris and her rich dowry. The old King, having considered what was the fittest course to be taken, determined for war, and convoked the States of his kingdom, in order to acquaint them with his resolution. 
 There were now, at the court of Teran, two younger brothers, Princes of the blood of Tamerlane, whose personal merit seemed to render them worthy of the highest fortune. They entertained
 
the most violent passion for Almanzaris; but, having nothing but their birth and qualifications to recommend them, they had not yet dared to declare their intention. The King had observed what restraint they put upon themselves, in order to conceal their sentiments, and generously attributed this respectful deportment to the account of their other merits. 
 The grandees having posted up to the capital from all parts, and the deputies of the people repaired to the palace, the wise Corduba addressed them in these terms: 
 "I have not yet lived too long, my people: for, each day of my life, by being employed in promoting the advantage of my subjects, has been without reproach. But, as my infirmities no longer allow me to live for your sakes, it is time for me to depart; or, at least, until it pleases God to cut me off from the number of the living, I ought to employ the few days he grants me, in endeavouring to prevent your being injured by my death." 
 The good King was interrupted by the sighs and tears of the assembly. 
 "Akebar and Mameluke wish to reign over you, continued the aged Monarch. They are destitute of all right to my throne, as well as my daughter; yet they threaten to acquire both by force of arms. I am a King, I am a father, O Teranites! and I know what sort of husband is proper for my daughter; and what Sovereign my subjects ought to wish for. Akebar and Mameluke are alike unworthy of
 
my choice; and, whatever may be their force, it is better to have them for enemies than for masters. Illustrious descendants of the great Timur! brave Korem! intrepid Zendar! to you I commit the care of preserving the Teranites from oppression. Divide between you the forces of my kingdom, and march against my enemies. The head of my people and the husband of my daughter must be an hero: Contend both of you for this title with a noble emulation: He that shall have deserved it, at the end of this war, shall be King of the Teranites and the husband of Almanzaris." 
 Corduba dissolved the assembly. They answered him with shouts of applause. He dispatched orders for Korem and Zendar to be obeyed throughout Teran, as if he himself were present. 
 Zendar laboured with extraordinary diligence in augmenting the army he was to command: He won the hearts of the soldiers by liberalities, and animated the officers by marks of distinction and the most flattering hopes: He collected vast quantities of provisions and ammunition, erected magazines, exercised his levies, and took the field, as soon as the season was favourable. It was his lot to march against Mameluke. As the petty republics, that lay between the kingdoms of Teran and Carism, might suffer themselves to be wrought upon by the promises, or intimidated by the menaces of the Sultan, Zendar made sure of them by surprising their towns, putting garrisons in their fortresses, and
 
seizing their arms; and, having nothing more to fear from these petty states, which he had rendered incapable of molesting him, he poured like a torrent into the kingdom of Carism. 
 Mameluke was too well acquainted with the pacific temper of Corduba to expect such vigorous proceedings. He had not even assembled his army, when Zendar, master of the field, had made several great towns open their gates to him. The General of the Teranites, equally skilful and active, attacked such places as shut their gates against him: He continued his approaches so artfully, carried them on so vigorously, and stormed the breaches with so much bravery, that, in a few days, the most resolute garrisons surrendered at discretion. 
 Already Zendar was in sight of Carism, when the Sultan, at the head of an army much more numerous, advanced to oppose his rapid progress. For several days successively, there were skirmishes between large parties, in which the Teranites had always the advantage. The Sultan, considering those losses as so many presages of a general defeat, in case he ventured a battle, made proposals for a peace: The principal conditions were, That he would renounce his pretensions to Almanzaris; that he would be the ally of him that should marry her; that he would render homage to the King of Teran for the territories of Carism, which Zendar had put under contribution. 
 The Teranite Prince rejected these proposals as ridiculous; Mameluke, said he, relinquished what he could not any longer hope to obtain, and desired to become a vassal, when he could not avoid becoming a subject. The battle was fought under the walls of Carism, and lasted the whole day. The Sultan behaved like a Prince whose only resource lay in a victory, and performed prodigies of valour. Zendar acted the part of a great Captain and a brave soldier; more than once, by his personal bravery, he animated his disordered broken troops to return to the charge; and, by his profound capacity, he obviated the ill consequences of other unlucky incidents. In fine, he fixed fortune to his standard; his victory was complete. The Sultan, leaving half of his army dead on the field of battle, brought off the flower of the rest into his capital, and there shut himself up, resolving to be buried in its ruins, if the enemy refused to listen to peace. 
 Zendar was deaf to the intreaties of the Sultan's deputies. After letting his army rest a few days, he formed his lines of contravallation round the city. He amused the Sultan with all the preparations and works requisite for a regular siege, and, taking the advantage of a dark night, ordered a general scalade. The Sultan ran to that side where the greatest efforts were made, judging that Zendar must be there in person: He beheld this implacable enemy, who, bearing down all that opposed him, had already got footing on the counterscarp, and was preparing to
 
force his way to the rampart. Urged by despair, or hoping to retrieve all by single combat, he cut his way up to the Prince, and challenged him. Zendar's fortune did not forsake him; his first blow laid Mameluke dead at his feet. The rumour of his death once spread, the Carismites laid down their arms, and implored the clemency of the conqueror, who, with great difficulty, drew off his furious soldiers from the carnage. 
 At break of day, Zendar secured the posts of the city, caused Corduba to be proclaimed Sultan of Carism, and made the inhabitants swear allegiance to him; and, as it took up no more time to subdue the rest of the kingdom, than was necessary to march through it, he returned to Teran towards the end of autumn, and laid at the feet of Almanzaris one of the most considerable crowns of Tartary. 
 While Zendar filled Teran with the fame of his exploits, the Teranites scarce remembered that his rival, Korem, had an army under his command; and yet he had laboured indefatigably towards the acquisition of a title on which his happiness depended; but he took a course different from Zendar's. His first care was to dispel the fears and jealousies of the petty republics situated between the kingdoms of Balk and Teran. As pledges of his fidelity in keeping his word with them, he gave them hostages, and thereby acquired a right to demand hostages of them. He sent manifestoes into the provinces of Balk, setting forth the motives of
 
the war, and making Akebar the cause of all the calamities it might bring upon the people: Besides which, he ordered trusty emissaries to lie concealed in the enemy's towns, to mix in company with the citizens, to extol the conduct he proposed to observe, and to exaggerate every loss the King might sustain. Thus assured of the affections of the neutral republics, he made no other provision for his expedition, but arms and money; and, followed by twenty thousand Teranites, picked out of the most robust and docible in that part of the kingdom which had been assigned him for making levies, he began his march. The punctuality with which he paid for what he required, soon made his camp abound with all kinds of provisions; the peasants flocked to him with every thing they could spare; and, thinking themselves happy in a war, that inriched without exposing them to any danger; love and gratitude attached them to the General, to whom they were indebted for this surprising scene. 
 So much caution and moderation gave Akebar leisure to assemble his forces: He was already on the frontiers, with a prodigious army, not doubting in the least that he should crush Korem; but he little knew what sort of an enemy he had to deal with. This Prince, being charged to preserve the Teranites from oppression, contented himself with protecting them. Ever upon the wing with his little army, which he even frequently divided into flying parties, he applied himself to keeping Akebar in continual
 
alarm. He made choice of posts where he might fight only when he pleased: He charged his officers to decline every skirmish that might bring on a general engagement, but not to avoid any other action. By this conduct he succeeded in stopping, fatiguing, and consuming that numerous army, which could not move, without being exposed to the sword of the vigilant Teranites. 
 Akebar, having seen all his foragers cut off, and one of his quarters beat up and plundered, resolved to bring the war to a short issue, by penetrating into the kingdom of Teran. He entered the territories of the neutral petty republics; but, as he was not disposed to pay for what he thought he had a right to exact, and as his enemy had the hearts of the people, he soon found himself in want of provisions. 
 Korem, who had foreseen all this, depended on the troops he had left on the frontier, for making head against the King. As for his part, having caused part of his cavalry to take an extensive circuit, in order to lay under contribution the provinces of Balk, which were quite bare of troops, he followed Akebar in the rear with the rest of his army, incessantly and harrassing him, retarding the arrival of those convoys which he could not cut off, and daily reducing his army to greater straits. 
 The peasants, finding that the soldiers of Akebar used them ill, annoyed them in every respect, and began a kind of war that was more cruelly managed than open hostilities. The contributions levied by
 
the Teranite cavalry, filled the kingdom of Balk with consternation, and made all the people murmur. The supplies, which Akebar drew from his dominions, stopped all on a sudden; a sickness broke out in his army; and, to complete his misfortunes, Korem managed so artfully, that he cut off his retreat home. Thus all hearts fainted in his camp. 
 In so terrible a situation Akebar sued for peace, leaving Korem intirely master of the conditions, and resolving to die, should they prove intolerable: The Teranite Prince sent him this answer: 
 "Kings should make war to establish peace. Promise, Sir, to observe faithfully the alliance with Corduba and the successor he shall please to appoint, and repair the damage you have occasioned to the neutral republics and the Teranites. Would to God we could bring the slain to life! Then might all be forgotten." 
 Akebar, struck with admiration, swore to observe the peace; he gave security for the performance of articles; and, in his march back to his capital, he proclaimed every-where, that Korem's virtue was equal to his talents. The Prince, after disbanding his army, repaired to Teran, to give an account of his expedition. Corduba, too well informed to be ignorant of any part of Korem's conduct, had already passed sentence between the two rivals. He called together, however, the States of Teran, who being assembled, and the Deputies of Carism having been called to sit with them, Corduba thus spoke: 
 "Intrepid Zendar, your courage and conduct have acquired me a new kingdom; but the subjects, which your conquest procures me, are only enemies in disguise, whom you add to the number of my children. I will not, by adopting them, introduce discord into my family. Let the Carismites have a King, whose love cannot be divided between them and another people." 
 "Go, brave Zendar, go and reign in Carism. The terrible effects of your valour have made you dreaded and admired in that fine empire. Let your great talents rest, and add to them virtues of a higher value. The losses the Carismites have suffered by your means, ought to be repaired; they will not allow you to indulge your genius, and to exhibit to them a mere conqueror on the throne of their Kings: shew yourself to them as a father, and constrain them, by continual benefactions, to bless the hand that shed their blood." 
 "As for you, generous Korem, who know how to vanquish the enemies of the Teranites, and to procure them friends; you, who love peace, understand the art of war, and excel in the practice of useful and amiable virtues, be my daughter's Consort; receive my Scepter together with her Hand. Under such a King as you, my people have nothing to fear either from intestine vices and disorders, or neighbouring nations. Be their master, and be my son. You are a Hero, Zendar may become one." 
 
 
 
 
 
 EUSTACE. 
 Korem was indeed, Sir, an illustrious Hero. If ever I should arrive at the command of an army, I hope to be like him. 
 
 
 NANCY. 
 I hope you would; for, indeed, it makes one's heart chill with horror when we read of so many dreadful relations of men murdering each other, of the sacking of towns, of killing poor helpless women and children, and all the rest of their horrible cruelties. 
 
 
 HARRY. 
 Pray, papa, can you tell me why Frenchmen and Englishmen don't love one another? I am always hearing of their going to fight: and then we ring the bells, and make bonfires, when the English have killed a good many of the poor Frenchmen; and, I am sure, I can't guess why; for all the Frenchmen I have ever seen are so good-natured, and so civil, that I can't believe they would quarrel with any body in the world by their own good-will. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 The subject we have been discoursing upon Ambition, my dear, is the cause. Neither Frenchmen nor Englishmen have, of themselves, any natural propensity to hate each other, but it is the destructive views of a few, who inspire that
 
passion, and encourage nations to butcher each other, to serve their own selfish and ambitious purposes. 
 
 
 MISS FORRESTER. 
 I have always, Sir, been a great admirer of such Kings as were rather disposed to forgive than to punish criminals. I have heard people say that no man ought to put another to death. 
 
 
 MR. FORRESTER. 
 That is a very ridiculous doctrine. I could wish those who broach it might first be robbed of their property: if that will not convert them, let their lives be attacked; and see what effect this would produce. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 It is part of the novel and paradoxical philosophy of the present day, in which I am sorry to say, it does not appear to be to much the endeavour of our reasoners to enforce truth as to incite surprize; and in which those who are incapable of attracting the public notice by the strength of their genius, do yet obtain a temporary admiration by the strangeness of their assertions. Mercy is undoubtedly a most heavenly virtue; "It droppeth like the gentle rain from Heaven on the place beneath;" but even this divine attribute, even Mercy, may be misapplied, may become a vice, may become CRUELTY. To let criminals of a certain complexion escape, is to
 
multiply crimes. Nerva, the successor of the cruel Domitian, carried this virtue to such excess, as even during his short reign to become, in some degree, contemptible. The following anecdotes will help to point out the distinction I mean to inculcate. 
 
 
 
 
 MERCY. Anecdotes of OTTOMAN and ALIVERDI. 
 OTTOMAN, the first Sultan of the Turks, was of so mild a temper, that to this day, at the ceremony of proclaiming the Emperors his successors, they wish them his meekness. One day his officers brought to him a man that had been found concealed in the Imperial tent with a dagger under his garment. The criminal confessed that he intended to murder the Sultan; and the officers waited impatiently for orders to execute the villain: But Ottoman, whom nothing could warp from his good-nature, said to the officers, let the wretch go, I cannot resolve to shed blood. 
 This instance of unbounded clemency has its value, though it is the effect of temper: But let us see whether clemency produced by sentiment and reflection is not superior to it. 
 Aliverdi, generalissimo of the armies of Abbas the Great, King of Persia, and his prime minister, was as good a general and as able a politician, as he was amiable in the capacity of a courtier. From the constant serenity of his countenance it was
 
judged that nothing could ruffle the calmness of his heart; and virtue displayed itself in him so gracefully and so naturally, that it was supposed to be the effect of his happy temper. An extraordinary incident made the world do him justice, and placed him in the rank he deserved. 
 One day as he was shut up in his closet, bestowing on affairs of state the hours which other men devote to sleep, a courier quite out of breath came in and told him, that an Armenian, followed by a posse of friends, had in the night surprized his palace at Amandabat, destroyed all the most valuable furniture in it, and would have carried off his wife and children, doubtless to make slaves of them, had not the domestics, when the first fright was over, made head against him. The courier added, that a bloody skirmish ensued, in which his servants had the advantage at last; that the Armenian's friends were all killed upon the spot, but that their leader was taken alive. 
 I thank thee, Offali The Prophet most revered by the Persians next to Mahomet. , cried Aliverdi, for affording me the means to revenge so enormous an attempt. What! whilst I make a sacrifice of my days and my repose to the good of Persia; while, through my cares and toils, the meanest Persian lives secure from injustice and violence, shall an audacious stranger come to injure me in what is most dear to me! Let him be thrown into a dungeon,
 
and give him a quantity of wretched food sufficient to preserve him for the torments to which I destine him. The courier withdrew, charged with these orders to those who had the Armenian in custody. 
 But Aliverdi soon growing cool again, cried out, What is it, O God, that I have done! Is it thus that I maintain the glory of so many years? Shall one single moment eclipse all my virtue! That stranger has cruelly provoked me: But what impelled him to it? No man commits evil merely for the pleasure of doing it: There is always a motive, which passion or prejudice presents to us under the mask of equity; and it must needs be something of this kind that blinded the Armenian to the dreadful attempt. Doubtless, I must have injured the wretch! 
 He dispatched immediately an express to Amandabat, with an order under his own hand, not to make the prisoner feel any other hardship than the privation of liberty. Still tranquil, after this act of moderation, he applied himself again to public business, till he should have leisure to sift this business to the bottom. From the strict inquiries he ordered to be made, he learned, that one of his inferior officers had done very considerable damage to the Armenian, considering the mediocrity of his fortune; and that he himself had slighted the complaints brought against him. Eased by this discovery, he called for the Armenian, whose countenance
 
expressed more confusion than terror, and passed this sentence upon him. 
 "Vindictive stranger, there was some ground for thy resentment; thou didst think I had justly incurred thy hatred; I forgive thee the injury thou hast done me. But thou hast carried thy vengeance to excess; thou hast attacked a man whom thou oughtest to respect; nay, thou hast attempted to make thy vengeance fall upon innocent heads: therefore I ought to punish thee. Go, and reflect in solitude on the wretchedness of a man that gives full swing to his passions. Thy punishment, which justice requires of me, will be sufficiently tempered by my clemency; and thy repentance may permit me to shorten the term." 
 
 
 
 
 HARRY. 
 That Aliverdi was a very good man, papa, because he loved his wife and children. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Yes, my dear; but, observe, though he loved them very much, he would not suffer either love or pity to subvert justice. 
 
 
 HARRY. 
 And yet, papa, I have heard that love makes people do strange things. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Very true, my dear; love is a powerful passion, the effects of which cannot be too cautiously attended
 
to and guarded against by young people. It is a passion which ought not to be mentioned in a careless and slight manner, nor without the utmost purity of sentiment. The novels which undertake the difficult task of pourtraying love, generally paint it as weak, cunning, and contemptible; but in persons in whom virtue and real dignity of mind are conspicuous, it is simple, chaste, and noble. The story of Mahmut and Idris will shew you what it ought to be; I must only caution you all to remember, that in Persia, where the scene is laid, the manners are very different from ours, and that though the refusal of Idris to become the wife of Mahmut, and acting, as she afterwards did, would have been wrong here, there it was not only proper but heroic. 
 
 
 
 
 LOVE. IDRIS and MAHMUT. 
 AMONG the dancers of the palace, in the reign of Abbas the Great, King of Persia, there was a young maid, named Idris, whom the master of the revels, on the report of her charms, had sent for from Casbin to Ispahan. Her mother being of the same profession, she had followed that way of life: But as she honourably distinguished herself from her female companions, she demonstrated that virtue is practicable in every situation, however slippery or dangerous it may be. 
 Scarcely had Idris appeared on the theatre of the capital, but she found herself beset by the grandees, who strove to please her by the same means that had won others in that station. Every one exerted his faculties and address, in order to gain the preference over his rivals. But Idris was not to be caught with such baits. At the palace, at assemblies, in the public walks, and in all places, the discourse turned upon the new dancer: Every one talked of her beauty, her wit, and her engaging behaviour; and, which was more than they had ever said of any other of her profession, they agreed in acknowledging her to be virtuous. It is the property only of the most exalted virtue to gain the respect and admiration of young courtiers. Mahmut conceived a high opinion of Idris's virtue, from the extraordinary effect it produced. 
 Mahmut bore among the young Lords of the Court the same character which Idris maintained among the dancers of her sex; proof against the defects of his equals and the vices of his station. As soon as he began to appear in the world, he became sensible of the ridiculousness of that noisy, obstreperous giddiness, which most young people of quality affect; and being happily prejudiced against the idle life he saw them lead, he took care not to follow their example, yet without seeming to condemn them. While their days were divided between the toilet, the table, visits, ladies' bed-chambers, and gaming, he spent the morning in his closet among
 
his books, or with those whose conversation could instruct him better. In the afternoon he frequented the manufactories, and working places about the palace; talked with the ablest hands in the several arts; and observed with the utmost attention how they proceeded in their works. In the evening he went to the Play or other public entertainments, which he enjoyed with the moderation that is ever inseparable from taste and discernment: After which he repaired to some of the most brilliant assemblies of Ispahan, as well to avoid a singularity that would have rendered him odious, as to acquire a greater share of the complaisance and politeness which reigned in them. Mahmut's wit, and the use he made of it, rendered him superior to those who were his equals in birth; and besides the advantage of a good figure and graceful air, he distinguished himself no less among them by his natural and acquired talents. Idris could not behold this amiable Persian without emotion: She immediately shunned all her importunate suitors; and complacently fancying him free from all their faults, she secretly wished that the beauty, which they had so highly extolled, might make an impression on him. Her wishes were met more than half-way: Mahmut soon let her know that he loved her most passionately; and her answer to his declaration, on account of its singularity, deserves to be given entire. 
 "Doubtless you give the name of love (said she with an enchanting smile) to that which is only an
 
effect of your taste for novelty. I will not, my Lord, go farther at present on this head: 'Tis your business to fix my judgment. I will ingenuously confess, though it will give you an unfavourable opinion of me, if you are not the man I take you to be, that I am not displeased at your liking me: yet if ever I see occasion to alter the idea I have conceived of you, hope not that I shall in the least indulge my inclination. I shall not take it ill, if you give your heart to a more virtuous woman; therefore do not complain of your lot, if I dispose of mine in favour of any man whom I may find superior to you in virtue." 
 Mahmut, struck with admiration and overflowing with joy, laboured to rise to such a pitch as might oblige Idris to be constant to him. He applied himself with fresh vigour to acquire the arts and sciences necessary for a man in his station. He made it his business to relieve indigent merit and unfortunate virtue. His humanity, generosity, capacity and modesty, were equally conspicuous; and Idris abundantly rewarded him for all the pains he took to please her. Praise grounded on truth, and coming from the mouth of so charming a person, filled the tender Mahmut's heart with joy and satisfaction. He read in the eyes of his beauteous mistress how dear he was to her: He talked of his attachment, and described its sincerity; Idris listened to him with pleasure, vowed she would make him a just return, and thus animated him to give her no occasion to
 
repent her engagement. In these overflowings of their hearts, which none but true lovers can know and feel the sweetness of, they laid open to each other the most secret recesses of their souls. Mahmut was grieved whenever he took leave of Idris; nor could she bear his absence without a visible concern: They always parted under the greatest impatience to meet again. 
 Between two neighbours so powerful as the Grand Signior and the King of Persia, there can be no long peace: A war soon broke out, and Mahmut was obliged to set out for the army. He waited upon Idris, to deplore with her the dire necessity that forced them asunder: But while he lay at her feet, he durst not disclose to her all his grief: The fortitude of the fair one daunted him; he was afraid of lessening himself in her esteem, by discovering any weakness. Idris perceived the sore conflict in his breast, and loved him for it the more intensely. 
 Mahmut had not been gone a month, when he gave way to his desire of an interview with Idris. He slipped away privately from the army, and with the help of relays which he had got ready on the road, he was at the gates of Ispahan before they missed him in the camp. Alighting at the house of one of his old servants, he disguised himself in the apparel of a peasant, that he might not be known in the city; and, impatient of an interview with his Idris, he flew to her house. 
 The charming maid was sitting at her balcony as Mahmut was advancing, and knew him, notwithstanding his disguise. Grieved to see him thus neglect his glory and his duty, she ran directly to her closet, charging her slave to admit no visitor whatever. She melted into fears at the weakness of her lover; but soon recovering herself, she wrote him the following billet. 
 
 IDRIS to the PEASANT. 
 "Friend, I know that thou art to be forthwith at the army. Call upon Mahmut, and tell him from me, that I desire him to remember the conditions on which the heart of Idris is to be secured." 
 
 Mahmut was too much confounded with these few words, to ask any questions of the slave that delivered him the billet. He went back to his domestick's house, to put off his disguise; and fluctuating between admiration, grief, and fear, he repaired again to the army with as much haste as he had travelled up to Ispahan. His chief study being to make amends for the fault he had committed, he behaved the rest of the campaign with so much ardor, bravery and conduct, that he was deservedly promoted to a higher post, which the King conferred on him, with the most honourable eulogies, at the head of the army. Idris wrote him a congratulatory letter on his promotion, in which, without mentioning his weakness, she gave him to understand that she had forgiven him. 
 Mahmut, transported with joy, hastened back to Ispahan as soon as the army was ordered into winter quarters; and listening to no other considerations but his esteem for the virtuous girl, he entreated her to complete his happiness in becoming his wife. Your wife, my Lord! answered Idris, with a kind of surprize mixed with indignation: What! would Mahmut forget himself so far? In disposing of your heart, you may indeed consult nothing but your inclination: But when the question is to choose a partner in your dignity and fortune, you are accountable to those of whom you hold both. I that am ready to sacrifice my life, were it necessary, to preserve your glory, shall not be instrumental myself in sullying it. 
 Sentiments like these made the passionate Mahmut only more pressing. What are those things, said he, which, create so great a disparity between us? An instant may deprive me of them: But the dowry which you will bring me, charming Idris, is a blessing that depends not on men nor fortune. In uttering these words, his countenance began to be clouded with grief: Fresh denials drove him to despair; he drew his poniard, and was going to plunge it into his breast. The tender Idris could hold out no longer: Ah! Mahmut, cried she, stop your hand, and live: To-morrow I shall be your's; grant me this short respite. She could not utter more; tears put an end to her surprize, and stopt her speech. Ashamed of her weakness, she broke loose
 
from her lover's arms, withdrew to her closet, and soon repented the promise she had made. 
 In the mean while Mahmut was desperate enough to resolve upon death, if she denied his request. The maid, wavering between tender passion, and concern for the glory of her lover, soon hit upon a device that would reconcile them. While she was free, notwithstanding the meanness of her condition, she could not in honour give herself to him, upon any other terms than marriage; and considering the distance which fortune had put between them, she was sensible she could not receive the title of wife without disgracing her admirer. She resolved then to remove those obstacles to her Mahmut's happiness, at the expence of what was most dear to her. Wrapping herself up therefore in a long mantle, she left her house in the dusk of the evening, and sold herself to a dealer in slaves. After this she wrote the following letter to Mahmut. 
 
 MY LORD, 
 "You have not judged me unworthy to be your wife, and I have the deepest sense of gratitude for this signal testimony of your esteem. I think my heart and my sentiments would not have disgraced that honourable quality: But what would your relations say? What would all Persia say, whose eyes are upon you, and who see nothing in me but the mean profession I was bred to? I allow that in one moment you may be deprived of every thing that
 
makes the great disparity between us: But if ever you should be borne down by adverse fortune, the whole world would be forced to acknowledge the injustice, and to pity and admire you. You love Idris: You are resolved to die, if she does not make herself your's: Come then and take her out of the house of the master, to whom she has sold herself, in order that you yourself may become her master. She is not qualified to be your wife: Take her then as your slave." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DIALOGUE XII. 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 IN our conversations, children, we have had frequent occasion to mention the Eastern nations, from the tales which have lately multiplied among us; some of which I have introduced here, for the sake of their moral intent, as well as for variety. The doctrines of Mahomet being now almost universally received in the East, I thought an account of the man, and his opinions, would tend not only to inform your minds, but to make you tolerant in your principles. I have, therefore, drawn up the narrative, which I am going to read for your use and information.
 
Afterwards, I mean to give you some advice relative to superstition, and its pernicious effects. 
 
 
 
 
 An Account of MAHOMET and MAHOMETANISM. 
 OF all the passions incident to man, there is not one whose perversion and abuse has proved so great a scourge as ambition; and of all ambitious men, there is not one, whose history we are acquainted with, who has been so thoroughly destructive to the rights and privileges of men as Mahomet. Christians have continued, for ages, persecuting, burning, destroying, and exterminating each other. Mahometanism has prevented this, by rendering its followers such entire, such absolute slaves, to one man, that their passions and tempers seem sunk into an indolence of habit, that is scarcely possible to be overcome. There are various opinions respecting the descent of Mahomet, some affirming him to have been, originally, a slave, others that he was of the tribe of Corash, the most opulent and powerful of all Arabia, and that he was born at Mecca, and the son of one of the most considerable people of that tribe. This last is Dr. Prideaux's account, and he appears to have consulted the best authorities. Mahomet, in humble imitation, as we may suppose, of our Saviour, has two genealogies, with abundance of hard names, one of which goes as far back as Adam, including Abraham, Noah, and the Patriarchs.
 
It is certain, however, that he was poor in his youth, and became a servant to a rich merchant's widow, whose business he transacted for some time, and, afterwards, married her. This woman's name was Cadigha, and her wealth was the beginning of Mahomet's good fortune: for it does not appear, that Mahomet had any thoughts of erecting a kingdom under the cloak of religion, till he was tolerably advanced in life. There were numerous events and accidents, that made the age of Mahomet the most proper of all others for establishing a new religion. The East, instead of that peaceful sloth it now enjoys, was rent into a thousand sects of Arians, Trinitarians, Donatists, Mestorians, Pelagians, Monothelites, Jews, Pagans, &c. &c. Mahomet in his travels into Egypt, and over the East, as a factor to his mistress, Cadiga, had observed the violence and acrimony of their disputes, and, it is most probable, had the good sense to see their absurdity. When, in consequence of his wife's fortune, and his own intrigues, he became one of the chief persons of Mecca, his ambition prompted him to invite men of every character to join him, and, in some measure, to become dependant on him. Mahomet was little better than the chief of a band of robbers, that skulked about the neighbourhood of Mecca, and his first appearance in the character of a hero was at the head of these in the wars the Emperor Heraclius had with the Persians, in which, it seems, he gained great applause. There happened a mutiny among
 
the Arabian troops, too, and Mahomet put himself at the head of the factious, by which he became more powerful. Indeed, if we may judge from historical relations, it was the versatility of the Arabian temper, and their inherent disposition to rebellions and insurrections, that first inspired him with the design of becoming a King, and a Conqueror, by turning this disposition to the advancement of his project; and I have no doubt but every age, every kingdom, afford men sufficiently daring, turbulent, capable, and ambitious, to enact the parts of Cromwell, Mahomet, or Julius Caesar, were the same opportunities and circumstances to occur. Mahomet was peculiarly fortunate, I mean as a restless man, who panted for renown by the best or the worst of means. The sectaries, that have been mentioned, though their hatred to each other was inveterate and implacable, had yet numerous particulars in which they were all agreed: the strong truths of morality were ever obvious, they ever were and ever will be the same. Mahomet possessed an acuteness that taught him how to turn every thing to his own advantage. He took those opinions that were most general for the basis of his new doctrine; he pretended to have a great respect for Moses, Jesus Christ, and John the Baptist. He invented a very agreeable Paradise, and such as man would naturally wish to enjoy, when he is told he may enjoy it with innocence and security. Fruits, flowers, rivers, women, wine, and every earthly happiness, in the
 
fullest perfection, were to be abundant in excess; and, on the contrary, Hell Torments were most liberally denounced against all unbelievers. Not even do our modern methodists make so terrible a use of future misery as did Mahomet. They burn through every chapter of the Alcoran. "We have decorated the Heavens with stars, says Mahomet, in the Chapter of the Empire, we have chased the Devils from thence; but we have prepared an immense cauldron, and the fire of Hell for the infidels. They hear nothing but the frightful and horrible voice of rage and despair, when they are first precipitated there, when they are cast down, when they enter into Hell, troop after troop, and behold the torments, they lament. Those who hear them shall ask, What! was there no person on earth who prophesied, who preached to you of the pains of Hell? Yes, alas! they shall answer, but we have given the lye to the preachers; we have said they were not commanded of God, they were deceivers, who wanted us to believe lies and absurdities. If we had listened to them, if we had believed them, we should not, at this day, have been numbered among the damned. Thus they shall confess their sins from the depths of Hell." Full of Hell and denunciation is the Alcoran. The passage I have quoted was the first that presented itself on opening the book. 
 Mahomet was one of those enterprizing empirics who saw the credulity, incapacity, and ignorance of man, and felt the power of such engines. 
 He was afflicted with the epilepsy, and had the hardiness to turn this terrible disease to the purposes of fanaticism. A man who falls down, foams at the mouth, gets up and tells enormous lies, which, by their novelty and improbability, lead the imagination, amazed and stupified with wonder without allowing it the liberty to doubt, through the wildest regions of fable: he who can do this too with ineffable effrontery, is well calculated to enact the part of pretended inspiration. Mahomet was as familiar with the angel Gabriel, as Socrates was with his daemon. Every thing was miraculous. Nothing puzzled Mahomet, for he had a fable, or rather an incoherent jumble of lies, to solve every difficulty. The earth was supported by an ox, whose feet were on a white stone; he had his head in the east, and his tail in the west; he had a thousand teeth, and as many horns, between each of which it was a thousand years journey. Under the white stone that he trod on, was Zohot, a mountain of Hell, of a thousand years journey also, which infidels are obliged to ascend to be cast down; under this are numerous lands and seas; and, at last, the wind, thunder, and lightening; the bloody sea, Hell closed, the fiery sea, the dark sea, the cloudy sea; praises, glorifications, the throne, the book, the pen, the great name of God! 
 But though the speculative doctrines of Mahomet were wild and inconsistent, his practical ones were very different; for, except in some instances where
 
the indulgence of his own lust or ambition made him less severe, his morality was rational, just, and productive of order. 
 Morality is the universal basis of religion; morality is a thing so self-evidently necessary to the welfare of communities, that we find none, however barbarous, without it. That it is incumbent on men to be just and faithful to each other, the gods of all nations, whether of wood or stone, comprehensible or incomprehensible, substance or chimera, universally allow, because the men who have made these various gods, felt themselves liable to injury, and wanting protection. Hope and fear are the master-keys of the human heart, the incentives to action, and the engines of priestcraft. They are the sword and shield of cunning, and by using these weapons like a master, Mahomet, in reality, conquered greater armies than ever did Amadis de Gaul, Orlando Furioso, or any other hero of romance. Whoever reads the Alcoran, will frequently forget that he is reading a book to which he is supposed to be a stranger, and that inculcates doctrines he is taught to abhor. The bulk of the book is little else than a recapitulation of Jewish stories about Moses, Joshua, David, and our great Redeemer. These are interspersed with promises, threatenings, and doctrinal points. The most essential difference between mahometanism and christianity is in the description of the life to come; and however refined, however platonic the Christian system may be, that
 
of Mahomet is certainly much better calculated to gratify the appetites, and delight the imaginations of men in a state of nature, because the pleasures of the senses are common to all. The rivers of Mahomet flow with wine and oil, with milk and honey. The plains of his heaven are rich in flowers, and spicy groves, and full of the trees of concupiscence, sidras and telech. His groves abound with birds of beautiful plumage, the most enchanting song, and the finest flavour. The trees yield the most delicious fruits. The fountain Zelzibil contains a wine of the most exquisite taste, which neither causes headachs nor drunkenness; and every thing is served up to them by young men handsomer than the angels. To make these delights still more desirable, they are to have virgins beautiful as the hyacinth or pearl, free from every blemish, and entirely unpolluted by angel, man, or devil; sitting in the shades, with breasts white as snow; and large beauteous black eyes fixed upon their husbands, with whom they continue in amorous dalliance for fifty years, and are to have their fill of pleasure in the presence of God, who is not ashamed. Another account of Mahomet's heaven says, the ground is of gold, enamelled with emeralds and hyacinths, planted with every fruitful tree, fertilized with streams of wine, with milk and honey. The day is of a thousand years, and the year of forty thousand days. The moment the blessed form a wish, it shall be gratified; they shall be cloathed in all colours except green, which
 
is the holy colour of Mahomet. They shall all be of the stature of Adam, the resemblance of Christ, and shall never increase or diminish. As soon as they enter Paradise, the dainty liver of the fish albehbut shall be set before them, and whatever else they desire. They shall have no more need to exonerate than the child in the womb, for they shall vent all superfluities by perspiration, which shall be as sweet as musk. They shall eat for delight but not for hunger. They shall eat of all flesh except the flesh of swine, which is unclean. 
 Let the mind be once impressed with the truth of the Mahometan doctrine, and the reality of such a heaven, and it will assuredly wish to become an inhabitant. After painting so luxurious a place, Mahomet, to further his ambitious views of conquest, made predestination a part of his system, by which he taught that no man could die till his time should come; that those warriors who fell in battle, infallibly went to heaven; that those who ran away were instigated to cowardice by the temptations of the devil, and for whom there was no salvation. It was impossible to conceive a stronger incitement to courage than such a paradise, and such a certainty of enjoyment. 
 His hell was as tremendous as his heaven was inviting; there were fountains of scalding water for the damned to drink; the tree ezecum for them to feed upon, which should burn in their bellies like fire; they were to have chains of seventy cubits in length, bound round and round them to keep them
 
safe. The cinders that the fire of hell cast forth, were as large as towers; the floor was of burning brimstone, that sent forth stinking and suffocating flames; it was full of pits of boiling pitch and sulphur, in which the damned were daily dipped; every thing was loathsome, every thing terrible; a collection of objects from which nature shrinks with horror. 
 Mahomet seemed to possess every art of leading the imagination of the enthusiast into the world of wonders. Thus his Alcoran was so powerful, that could the devils only hear it, they should be converted; nay more, they were once to hear it, and ONCE to repent. Whoever would read the Alcoran a thousand times over, should have women with eyebrows as large as the rainbow. The virgins who were the lot of the blessed, were so bright, that were one of them to come forth at midnight, in the absence of the sun, she would illumine the whole earth, and were she to spit into the sea, the salt water would instantly become sweet. The keys of paradise were, in number, threescore and ten thousand, each seven thousand miles long, and kept by the angel Gabriel, who was not able to open one of the gates without invoking the name of God, and of Mahomet the friend of God. The firmament is supported on the horn of a buffalo, who, when he stirs, occasions earthquakes. When God swears, says Mahomet, he is obliged to swear by beings inferior to himself, as by the blowing winds the
 
watery clouds, the sailing ships, the twilight and the dawn, the guilty souls, the devils, the order of angels, the Alcoran, &c. The following is the Mahometan History of the Last Day: At the Day of Judgment God shall command the angel of death to slay every creature; and God shall ask if any thing remain alive? Adriel, the angel of death, shall answer "nothing but myself;" and God shall say, go thy ways between Paradise and Hell, and kill thyself; and Adriel shall go, with his foul wings, and, prostrate on the earth, shall strangle himself with such hideous bellowing, that the very angels would be terrified were they alive, and the world shall he empty forty years. Then God shall ask, where now are the mighty men, the princes of the people? whose is now the kingdoms, the empires and the powers? Then shall he raise up Seraphiel, and say to him, take thou this trumpet (the length of the trumpet is five hundred years journey) and go to Jerusalem, and sound; and he shall sound, and all souls shall come forth, and the bones of the dead shall be gathered together; and forty years after that, he shall sound again, and the bones shall be cloathed with flesh and sinews; and after forty years, he shall blow a third blast, and all souls shall repossess their bodies; and a fire from the west shall drive every creature to Jerusalem, where they shall swim in their own moisture forty years. After which they shall come, with much vexation, to Adam, and shall say, father Adam! father Adam! wherefore hast thou begotten us to these miseries
 
and torments? why sufferest thou us to hang between hope and fear? Pray to God that he will determine for us between paradise and hell. And Adam shall excuse himself by reason of his unworthiness and disobedience, and send them to Noah; and Noah shall send them to Abraham, and Abraham to Moses, and Moses to Jesus Christ, and they shall say to him, oh! Spirit, Word, and Power of God, let thy pity move thee to make intercession for us. And he shall answer, that which ye ask ye have lost. I was indeed sent in the power of God and the word of truth, but ye have erred; ye have made me God, which is more than ever I preached unto you; but go to the last and greatest of prophets, go to Mahomet. Then shall they turn to Mahomet, and say, oh! faithful messenger! oh! friend of God! we have sinned; hear us, holy prophet, thou art our only hope. Then shall Gabriel and Mahomet go to the throne of God; and God shall say, I know wherefore ye are come; far be it from me that I should not hear the prayer of my Faithful One. Then shall a bridge be made over hell, whereon shall be set a balance, in which every man's works shall be weighed; and those who are saved, shall pass safely over the bridge; and the rest shall fall into hell; and in that day there shall be an hundred and twenty troops of men, and every troop shall be in length the journey of a thousand years, and in breadth five hundred; and three troops only shall be found faithful. Then shall death be transformed into a ram, and they
 
shall place him between heaven and hell, and there shall arise much strife between the inhabitants of hell and the inhabitants of heaven concerning death, but the inhabitants of heaven shall prevail, and shall slay death. 
 
 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 No person, my children, can read the above account of the Day of Judgment without admiring the sublimity and grandeur of the images that are there collected. It is taken from a dialogue between Mahomet and Abdllah Ebn Salam, a Jew, who was supposed to have assisted him in composing the Alcoran. Many particulars contained in this abstract, are taken from the accounts given by Commentators, and many from the Alcoran itself. 
 
 
 CHARLES. 
 It is very wonderful indeed, Sir; but surely Mahomet must have been exceedingly wicked to make the people believe such lies, and persuade them that he was a Prophet. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Yes, Charles, he was exceedingly wicked. I know no wickedness equal to that of disseminating lies under the mask of religion: that is, of propagating incoherent and contradictory opinions, of infusing mental terrors into the minds of the simple
 
and the ignorant, and of causing them to dispute, hate, and exterminate each other for ages to come, in support of doctrines which are so involved in mystery, absurdity and falsehood, that no two men, even among those who imagine they comprehend them, were ever of one belief. 
 
 
 EUSTACE. 
 Certainly, Sir, we have no right to either disturb or despise persons who think differently from ourselves. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 By no means. The Russians believe St. Nicholas swam down the river Volga on a mill-stone; the Gentoos worship a cow; the Egyptians a cat; the Papists a wafer. These things are ridiculous, but not pernicious, till they are rendered so by the arts of ambition, or the zeal of enthusiasm. Superstition should be pitied, not persecuted. A King of Siam had a white elephant, which he supposed was possessed of supernatural powers, and he, therefore, made it the object of his adoration. The King of Pegu was a cunning and ambitious Prince, that wanted a pretext to make war upon the King of Siam. For this purpose he likewise pretended to believe in the white elephant; ordained it sacrifices, paid it divine honours, and, at last, sent to demand it of the King of Siam, that it might be seen and worshipped by all the people of Pegu. The demand
 
was peremptorily refused by the King of Siam. This was foreseen by the King of Pegu, who had previously taken his measures, and having a vast army in readiness, immediately invaded Siam, which he conquered; added it to his own kingdom, and took the white elephant, which, that he might seem to be consistent, he caused all his subjects to adore. The religious wars of Christians, Jews, and Turks, are not unlike the war of the white elephant; religion is the pretence, but ambition is the motive. Men go to battle, and afterwards, with miraculous effrontery, to the temples of the God of Benevolence, to render thanks for having obtained the power to murder and destroy their own species; nay more, they pretend to fast, and to pray that they may induce the God of Mercy to be of their party. 
 Protestants themselves are sufficiently weak, sufficiently absurd, and have far, far too much of the persecuting spirit remaining among them. Let us, however, do them the justice to acknowledge, they are more rational, and more tolerant, than other sectaries. We are but too well acquainted with the persecutions of the Catholics, their inquisitions, and their massacres; yet do not let us cherish ourselves, or endeavour to inspire others with hatred towards them: their leaders, their rulers, and their instructors only are guilty. 
 The following account of a Turkish fast forcibly and lamentably describes the power of that superstition of which Mahomet was the founder. The
 
Sultan Selim having been constantly defeated in his wars with the Germans, who were commanded by the great Eugene, and being afraid of losing his crown and his life by popular insurrections, endeavoured to amuse the people, and divert them from rebellious thoughts by proclaiming a Fast, which exhibits a melancholy picture of abject folly, and incoherent cruelty. 
 
 
 
 
 PROCLAMATION. 
 ASHMED Selim, Sultan, Emperor of the East and of the West, Lord of Lords, true imitator of the prophet Mahomet, &c. The Grand Sultan being apprehensive, that the hand of the great God is stretched out against his government, his subjects, and his empire, since he permits them to be oppressed and tormented by their enemies the christians, who have vanquished them several times, both by sea and land, and taken from them a large extent of country; and all this, as it appears to him, because the mussulmans have corrupted themselves, and become too confident of their power: To appease the wrath of God, therefore, and of his prophet Mahomet, he expressly orders, That on Friday, after new moon, in the fifth, sixth, and seventh months, all and singular his subjects shall keep a rigorous fast all that day, and abstain from meat and drink, from the rising of the sun, till that of the stars. On that day, the Mufti, and other ecclesiastical servants, cloathed
 
with penitential garments of hair-cloth, with down-cast eyes, beards uncombed, and all in tears, shall repair first to the public places, and afterwards to the mosques, crying with all their strength, "Ya mofateth ilabwab," [i. e. Open the gates of thy favour.] In the island of Mecca, the prophet's coffin shall be laid open, and exposed to public view upon silver tressels, perfumed with incense, and filled with the bones of servants and spahi's killed in the battle; that the prophet, moved by so great and so sensible a loss, may be induced to appease the wrath of Heaven. This to be performed three Fridays, the coffin carried through the streets and in the fields; and all the pilgrims and inhabitants of the mosques, with the Chiefs of the trades, shall make the round seven times, singing, with a doleful voice, the Canticle of Lamentation, on account of this terrible destruction. No instrument of music shall be heard, but cries of sorrow and universal mourning; and, on the last day of fasting, a solemn and general procession shall be made, ten miles round, in the following order: 
 First, The procession shall begin with a coffin filled with dead men's bones, broken scimiters, flatted cuirasses, broken bows, and blunt arrows. All these shall be carried by six-hundred Turks cloathed in penitential habits, bare-footed and bare-headed, without turbans. 
 2. Three hundred mussulmans shall follow, with habits dyed in blood and strewed with ashes, striking
 
their breasts, with lamentable outcries and doleful howlings. 
 3. Six thousa d, n k d from their h ads to their girdles, shall lash their breasts and shoulders with thorns, till the blood droppeth on the ground, without their wiping it off. 
 4. The coffin of the prophet, supported by thirty Spahis without turbans, surrounded by four hundred Bashaws, with drawn scimiters, to destroy all who shall look on the coffin without respect, and whose bodies shall be cast to the dogs. 
 5. At every quarter of a mile, an ass and a Jew shall be killed, and left on the ground weltering in their blood. 
 6. Thirty land Bashaws shall be without purple, and with pitiful turbans of a black stuff dipped in the blood of the ass and the Jew, having one hand tied behind to the shoulder; without scimiters, but with tails of black horses dragging on the ground to raise the dust. 
 7. Three thousand Janizaries, without arms, having sticks in their hands trailing on the ground, shall cry, "Alla hasbi fagavuri!" [i. e. God is my protector! let him pardon me!] 
 8. A chest filled with silver to be thrown to the people, but not to be gathered, till the procession be over, under pain of being impaled alive. 
 9. In fine, this procession shall be closed by an innumerable multitude of people, in the midst of whom there shall be an hundred Turkish penitents, who
 
with knives shall cut off the flesh of their arms, their breasts, and their faces, the better to appease the wrath of the great God and his prophet Mahomet; and, at every quarter of a mile, they shall lift up the right-hand, and cry, with all their strength, "Alla sifai sededni Ahday." [i. e. I invoke God with my mouth, that he may fortify me against my enemies.] 
 
 
 
 
 NANCY. 
 This is a most barbarous and cruel ceremony, Sir. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Ay, my dear, so much so, that I would not have shocked your ears with so black a relation of human depravity, but that I wish to inspire a universal detestation of the persecuting spirit of superstition. We will close this subject with the fictitious travels of Scarmentado, which, though done in the form of a novel, contain a true and melancholy collection of facts. 
 
 
 
 
 SUPERSTITION: Or SCARMENTADO. 
 MY name is Scarmentado; my father was governor of the city of Candia, where I came into the world in the year 1600, and I remember that one Jro, a stupid and scurrilous poet, wrote a copy
 
of doggrel verses in my praise, by which he proved me descended from Minos in a direct line; but my father being disgraced some time after, he wrote another poem, by which it appeared I was no longer a-kin to Minos, but the descendant of Pasiphae and her lover. 
 When I was fifteen years old, my father sent me to Rome, to finish my studies. Monsignor Profonde, to whom I was recommended, was a strange kind of man, and one of the most terrible scholars breathing; he took it into his head to teach me the categories of Aristotle, and I narrowly escaped his throwing me into the category of his minions. I saw many processions and exorcisms, and much oppression. Signora Fatelo, a lady of no rigid morals, was foolish enough to like me: she was wooed by two youthful monks, the Rev. Father Poignardini, and the Rev. Father Aconiti, but she put an end to the pretensions of both of them, by granting me her good graces; yet, at the same time, I narrowly escaped being excommunicated and poisoned. I left Rome, exceedingly well pleased with the architecture of St. Peter's church. 
 I went to France, in the reign of Lewis, surnamed the Just; the first thing I was asked was, whether I chose a relish of the Marshal d'Ancre, whose body the public had roasted, and which was distributing very cheap to such as desired the happiness of tasting. This nation was at that time torn to pieces by civil wars, occasioned sometimes by ambition, sometimes
 
by controversy; and those intestine broils had for the space of forty years deluged the most delightful country in the world with blood. Such were the liberties of the Gallican church: the French, said I, are naturally wise; what makes them deviate from that character? They are much given to joking and pleasantry, and yet they commit a massacre; happy that age in which they shall do nothing but joke and make merry. 
 From hence I set out for England; the same fanatical temper excited here the same furious zeal; a set of devout Roman Catholics, had resolved, for the good of the church, to blow up the king, the royal family, and the parliament, with gunpowder, and thereby free the nation from those heretics. I was shewn the spot where the blessed Queen Mary, daughter to Henry VIII. had caused above five hundred of her subjects to be burnt alive. A pious Hibernian priest assured me, it was a very laudable action, first, because those they had burned were English; and, secondly, because they were wretches who never took any holy water, and did not believe in St. Patrick. 
 From England I went to Holland, in hopes of finding more peace and tranquillity among a more flegmatic people. At my arrival at the Hague, I was entertained with the beheading of a venerable old patriot, the prime minister Barnevelt, who was the most deserving man in the republic. Struck with pity at the sight, I asked what his crime was, and
 
whether he had betrayed the state? He has done worse, replied a preacher with a black cloak, he believes that we can be saved by good works, as well as by faith. You are sensible, that were such systems suffered to prevail, the commonwealth could not long subsist, and that a severe law is necessary to check and refute such scandalous errors. A deep Dutch politician told me with a sigh, that such commendable actions could not last for ever: Alas, Sir! said he, our people naturally incline towards toleration; some day or other they will adopt it; I shudder at the thought: believe me, Sir, pursued he, it is a mere chance that you actually find them so laudably and zealously inclined as to cut off the heads of their fellow-creatures for the sake of religion. Such were the lamentable words of the Dutchman; for my own part, I thought proper to abandon a country, whose severity had no compensation, and therefore embarked for Spain. 
 I arrived at Seville in the finest season in the year. The court was there, the galleons were arrived, and all seemed to proclaim joy, abundance, and profusion. I espied at the end of a beautiful alley, full of orange and lemon-trees, a vast concourse round an amphitheatre richly adorned; the king, the queen, the infants and infantas, were seated under a stately canopy, and over against that august family, another throne, higher and more magnificent, had been erected. I told one of my travelling companions, that unless that superb throne were dedicated to the Deity,
 
I could not see the use of it; but these indiscreet words being overheard by a grave Spaniard, I paid dear for having uttered them. In the mean time, I imagined we were to be diverted with a carousal, wrestling, or bull-baiting; when I perceived the grand inquisitor ascend that throne, and bestow his blessing upon the king and people. Then appeared an army of monks, filing off two by two; some were white, others were black, grey, and brown; some were shod, and some bare-footed; some had beards, and some had none; some were with cowls, and some without. Then came the executioner, followed by about forty wretches, guarded by a world of grandees and alguazils, and covered with garments, upon which were painted flames and devils. These fellows were Jews, who would not altogether be compelled to abandon the law of Moses; and Christians who had married their godmothers, or perhaps refused to worship Neustra Dama d' Atocha, or to part with their money in favour of the brothers Hieronymians. Prayers were said very devoutly, after which all those wretches were tortured and burnt: which concluded the ceremony, to the great edification of all the royal family. 
 The same night, while I was going to bed, two messengers from the inquisition came to my lodgings with the holy Hermandad. They embraced me tenderly, and, without speaking a word, carried me out of the house, and conducted me into a dungeon, not incommoded by heat, adorned with a curious
 
crucifix, and a mat instead of a bed. After I had been there six weeks, the father inquisitor sent his compliments, and desired to see me: I obeyed the summons: he received me with open arms, and after having embraced me with more than paternal fondness, told me, he was very sorry they had put me in so bad a lodging, but that all the apartments happening to be full, it was impossible to give me another; adding, however, that he hoped I should be better taken care of another time. He then asked me very lovingly, whether I knew why I was put in there. I told the reverend father, I supposed it was for my sins. Well, my dear child, replied he, but for what sin? make me your confident speak. I did all I could to bethink myself of some misdemeanor, but in vain; upon which, he made me recollect my imprudent words: in short, I recovered my liberty, after having undergone a severe discipline, and paid 30,000 reals. I went to take leave of the grand inquisitor; he was a very polite man, and asked me how I relished the holidays they had given me? I told him they were delightful, and at the same time went to press my companions to quit this enchanting country. They had time enough, during my confinement, to learn all the great atchievements of the Spaniards, for the sake of religion. They had read the memoirs of the famous bishop of Chiapa, by which it appears, that ten millions of infidels had been murdered in America to convert the rest. I imagined that bishop might exaggerate
 
a little, but supposing the victims were but half that number, the sacrifice was still admirable. 
 Notwithstanding the disagreeable adventures I had met with in my travels, determined to finish my tour, and accordingly embarked for Turkey, fully resolved never more to intermeddle with other people's affairs, nor give my judgment about public shews. These Turks, said I, to my companions, are a set of unbaptized miscreants; and of course more cruel than the reverend fathers of the inquisition. Let us be silent among the Mahometans. 
 I arrived at Constantinople, where I was strangely surprized to see more Christian churches than in Candia; but much more so, to see also a numerous train of monks, permitted to offer their prayers freely to the Virgin Mary, and to curse Mahomet, some in Greek, others in Latin, and some in Armenian. How reasonable are the Turks! exclaimed I. Whilst the Christian world stains a spotless religion with blood, these infidels tolerate doctrines which they abhor, without molestation or inhumanity. The Grecian and Latin Christians were at mortal enmity in Constantinople, and like dogs that quarrelled in the streets, persecuted each other with the utmost violence. The Grand Vizir protected the Greeks, whose patriarch accused me before him of having supped with the Latins, and I was most charitably condemned by the divan, to receive one hundred blows with a lath, upon the sole of the foot, with permission, however, to be excused for 500 sequins.
 
The next day the Grand Vizir was strangled; and the day following, his successor, who was for the Latin party, and who was not strangled till a month afterwards, condemned me to the same punishment, for having supped with the Grecian patriarch: and, in short, I was reduced to the sad necessity to frequent neither the Latin nor the Greek church. To make myself amends, I determined to make love to a young Turkish lass, who seemed to have a disposition as gentle, kind, and compassionate in private, as it was pious and devout in the mosque. One night, as I was pleading my passion, and complaining of her cruelty, she suddenly exclaimed, Oh alla, alla, alla. These are the sacramental words of the Turks, which I mistook for the soft transports of love, and therefore cried out in my turn, Oh alla, alla, alla ; upon which she said, "Let Mahomet be glorified, you are a Turk." In the morning the iman came to perform the initiating ceremony, but as I made some resistance, the cady, who certainly was a very loyal gentleman, told me he intended to have me impaled. I preserved my religion, &c. by a thousand sequins, and fled into Persia, firmly resolved never to go to the Latin or Grecian mass, or to say alla, alla, alla, in Turkey. 
 At my arrival at Ispahan, I was asked which I was for, white or black sheep? I answered, that the flesh of a white or black sheep was equal to me, provided it was tender. It should be known, that the factions of the white and black sheep still divided
 
 
 
 
 
the Persians, who imagined I meant to laugh at both parties, insomuch that I had scarce entered the city gates, when I had a sad affair to extricate myself from; which I did however with a good number of sequins, and by their means got safe out of the hands of these sheep. 
 I went as far as China with an interpreter, who informed me, that it was the only country where one might live freely, gaily, and peaceably. The Tartars had rendered themselves masters of it with fire and sword, and the reverend fathers me Jesuits, on one side, and the reverend fathers the Dominicans, on the other, said that they drew souls towards God every day, without any body's knowing it. Sure there never was a set of more zealous converters! for they persecuted one another by turns; and sent to Rome whole volumes of calumnies, wherein they were reciprocally called infidels and prevaricators. There was particularly a terrible quarrel among them, about the method of making a bow. The Jesuits taught the Chinese to salute their parents after the manner of their country; and the Dominicans, on the contrary, held that they ought to bow to them after the manner of Rome. I happened to be taken by the Jesuits for a Dominican, and they told his Tartarian majesty, that I was the Pope's spy. The supreme council immediately ordered the prime mandarin, who ordered a serjeant, who ordered four guards to arrest and bind me, with all the ceremony usual on such occasions. I was
 
brought, after one hundred and forty genu-flexions, before his majesty, who asked me, whether I really was the Pope's spy, and whether it was true, that his holiness intended to come in person to dethrone him? I answered, that the Pope was a priest, threescore and ten years of age; that he lived four thousand miles distant from his sacred Tartaro-Chinese majesty; that he had about two thousand soldiers, who mounted guard with an umbrella; that he never dethroned any body; and, in short, that his majesty might sleep in quiet. This was the last unfortunate adventure I met with in the whole course of my travels. I was sent to Macao, where I embarked for Europe. 
 I was obliged, in order to refit my ship, to put into a harbour, on the coast of Golconda. I laid hold of that opportunity, to go and see the court of the great Aureng-zebe, so much renowned for its wonderful magnificence: he was then at Delhi; and I had the good fortune to see him the day of that pompous ceremony, in which he received the Heavenly Present sent him by the sheriff of Mecca, viz. the broom, with which they had swept the holy house, the Caaba, and the Beth alla. That broom is a symbol which sweeps away all uncleanness of soul. Aureng-zebe had no occasion for it, since he was the most pious man in Indostan. It is true, he had cut his brother's throat, poisoned his father, and put to death, by torture, about twenty rayas, and as many omrahs; yet nothing was talked of but his
 
devotion, which, they said, was without equal, except that of his most sacred majesty Muley Ismael, the most serene emperor of Morocco, who never failed to strike off several heads, every Friday after prayers. 
 To all this I spoke not a word; my travels and adventures had taught me to bridle my tongue; and I was very sensible, it was not mine to decide between the piety of the emperors of India and Morocco. 
 I had not yet seen Africa; but whilst I was debating with myself, whether it was better to satisfy this last inclination, or sail for Italy, my ship was taken by the negroes, and I was, of course, carried thither. Our captain railed against the captors, asking them the reason why they thus outrageously violated the law of nations? They replied, Your nose is long, and Our's is flat; your hair is straight, and our wool is curled; you are white, and we are black; consequently we ought, according to the sacred and unalterable law of nature, to be ever enemies. You buy us on the coast of Guinea, as if we were not human creatures, then treat us like beasts, and with repeated blows constrain us to an eternal digging into the mountains, in order to find a ridiculous yellow dust, of no intrinsic value, and not worth a good Egyptian onion; therefore when we meet with you, and happen to be strongest, we make you our slaves, and force you to till our ground, or else we cut off your nose or ears. We had nothing to say
 
against so wise a discourse. I was employed to till the ground of an old negro woman, having no inclination to lose either my nose or my ears; and, after a twelvemonth's slavery, was redeemed by some friends I had written to for that purpose. 
 Having thus seen the world, and all that is great, good, and admirable in it, I resolved to return to Candia, where I married presently after my arrival, and soon became an example to devotees and jealous husbands, by the profound taciturnity and tranquillity which I observed upon all occasions. To say the truth, I found matrimony, when compared to what I had seen and suffered, a very tolerable evil. 
 
 
 
 
 
 DIALOGUE XIII. 
 
 CHARLES. 
 YOU were so good yesterday, Sir, as to explain the ill consequences of superstition, and the injustice of persecution. This brought to my mind the story of the flying chest, which I read some time ago; and I thought very diverting. As it is founded on superstition, will you give me leave to read it? Perhaps it will entertain the company. 
 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Very willingly, Charles; for though there is more of diversion than instruction in this tale, yet, as you may be innocently merry at the incidents, and as innocent mirth is very desirable, I gladly give my consent. Neither is it without a moral; it will caution you against credulity, and teach you not to give a hasty assent to bold and rash pretenders. 
 
 
 
 
 CREDULITY: Or the Story of MALEK and the Princess SCHIRINE. 
 I AM the only son of a rich merchant of Surat. A little while after his death, I spent the best part of the wealth he left me. I was making an end of the remainder with my friends, when a stranger that passed by Surat, to go, as he said, to the Isle of Ceylon, by chance dined at my table. They happened to talk about travelling. Some commended the usefulness and pleasure of it, others represented the dangers. Some of the company gave us an account of their travels. The curious things they had seen excited me to travel; but the dangers they had run through, hindered me from resolving on it. 
 After I had heard them all, I said, one cannot hear you speak of the pleasures you have had in going over the world, without feeling an extreme desire of travelling. But the dangers that travellers are exposed to, take from me the inclination of
 
seeing other countries. If one could, added I, smiling, go from one end of the world to the other, without meeting with unlucky accidents on the way, I should set off to-morrow from Surat. At these words, which made all the company laugh, the stranger said to me; Seigneur Malek, if you have a desire to travel, and if the danger alone of meeting with robbers hinders you from resolving to do so, I will teach you, when you will, a way to go from kingdom to kingdom, without any danger. I believed he was in jest; but after dinner he took me aside, and told me that the next morning he would come to me, and shew me something very extraordinary. 
 He did not fail: he came again to me, and said, I will keep my word with you; but you will not see the effect of my promise these two or three days, for it is a work that cannot be done to-day. Send one of your slaves for a joiner, and let them both bring boards with them; which was done immediately. 
 When the joiner and the slave were come, the stranger bid the joiner make a chest six feet long, and four broad. The workman went presently to work; the stranger, on his part, was not idle; he made a great many pieces of the machine, the vices and the springs. They worked all day long, and the joiner was dismissed: the stranger spent the day following to place the springs, and to perfect the work. 
 At three days end the chest was finished; it was covered with a Persian carpet, and carried into the
 
country, whither I went with the stranger: who said to me; send away your slaves, and let us stay here alone, I will have none near but yourself to be witness of what I do. I ordered my slaves to go home, and I staid alone with the stranger. I longed to know what he would do with this machine; he at length got in it, and at the same time the chest raised itself up from the ground, and cut the air with incredible swiftness; in one moment it sprung a great way from me, and the next was again at my feet. 
 I cannot tell you how much I was surprized at this prodigy. You see, said the stranger to me, getting out of the machine, a very easy carriage, and you ought to be persuaded, that, travelling after this manner, one need not fear being robbed on the road. This is the method I would have you take to travel in safety. I will make you a present of this trunk; you may make use of it when you have a mind to go into foreign countries. Think not, continued he, that there is any inchantment in what you have seen: 'tis not by cabalistick words, nor by virtue of a talisman, that this chest raises itself in the air. Its motion is made by an ingenious artifice, that shews the power of mechanics, of which I am a perfect master. 
 I thanked the stranger for so rare a present, and gave him, as an acknowledgment, a purse full of sequins. Inform me, said I to him afterwards, how I must do to set this chest in motion: I will teach
 
you that presently, answered he. At these words he made me go into the machine with him; touched a spring, and presently we were lifted up in the air. Then shewing me what method was to be taken to guide it right; in turning this vice, said he to me, you go to the right, and in turning that, you go to the left; by touching this string you ascend, and by touching that you descend. I made trial of it myself; I turned the vices, and touched the springs; the chest, effectually obedient to my hand, went which way I pleased, and hastened or slackened the motion as I managed. After having made a great many wheelings about in the air, we took our flight towards my house, and descended into my garden; which we easily did, because we had taken off the carpet that covered the machine, which had a great many holes through it, as well to admit the air, as to look through. 
 We were at home before my slaves, who were enough surprized to see us return. I locked the chest up in my apartment, where I kept it with as much care as if it had been a treasure; and the stranger went away as content with me, as I was with him. I continued to divert myself with my friends, till I had spent all my patrimony. I began also to borrow, insomuch that I insensibly found myself loaded with debts. As soon as it was known in Surat that I was ruined, I lost my credit, nobody would lend me any thing; and my creditors, impatient to have their money again, gave me notice to
 
pay it. Not knowing any longer which way to turn myself, and by consequence being liable to troubles and affronts, I had recourse to my chest: I drew it one night out of my apartment into my yard, I got into it, with some provisions, and the little money I had left. I touched the spring that made the machine mount; then turning one of the vices, I went far enough from Surat, and from my creditors, without fear of their sending any officers after me. 
 I made the chest go all that night as fast as possible, and I believed that I surpassed the wind in swiftness. At day-break, I looked through a hole to see where I was, and perceived nothing but mountains and precipices, a dry country, and a frightful desert; I could discover no appearance of an habitation. I continued to travel through the air all that day and the night following. The next day I found myself over a very thick wood, nigh which there was a very fine town situated in a plain of great extent. 
 I stopt to look at the town, as well as at a magnificent palace, that offered itself to my view at the end of the plain. I desired passionately to know where I was, and had already thought on a way to satisfy my curiosity, when I saw in the fields a peasant tilling the ground. I descended in the wood, where I left my chest, and went towards the husbandman, of whom I asked how they called the town. Young man, answered he, one may see you
 
are a stranger, since you know not that this town is called Gazna; the equitable and valiant King Bahaman makes it the place of his residence. And who lives, said I to him, in that palace that we see at the end of the plain? The King of Gazna, replied he, has built it to keep his daughter the Princess Schirine in, who is threatened by her horoscope to be deceived by a man. Bahaman, to elude this prediction, built this palace, which is of marble and surrounded with deep ditches of water. The gate is steel of China; and besides that, the King keeps the key of it; there is a numerous guard that watches night and day, to hinder any man from going in. The King goes once a week to see the Princess his daughter, and then returns to Gazna. Schirine has no company in this palace, but a governess and some maiden-slaves. 
 I thanked the peasant for his information, and went towards the town. When I was almost arrived there, I heard a great noise, and presently saw many horsemen, magnificently cloathed, and all mounted on very fine horses that were richly accoutred. I perceived, in the middle of that stately cavalcade, a lusty man, who had on his head a crown of gold, and whose cloaths were covered with diamonds. I judged that he was the King of Gazna, who was going to see the Princess his daughter, and I understood in the town that I was not deceived in my conjecture. 
 After I had taken a turn or two about the town, and satisfied my curiosity a little, I remembered my chest; and though I had left it in a place where I had reason to think it safe, yet I was uneasy. I went from Gazna, and I could not be satisfied, till I came where it was. Then I was at ease, I eat with a good appetite what was lest of my provision, and the night coming on, I resolved to spend it in the wood. I doubted not but I should sleep well; for neither my debts, nor the ill condition I found myself in, gave me much uneasiness: nevertheless I could not sleep; what the peasant had told me of the Princess Schirine was always in my thoughts. Is it possible, said I, that Bahaman should be afraid of a frivolous prediction? Was it necessary to build a palace to shut up his daughter in? Was she not safe enough in his? Besides, if astrologers can dive into the obscurity of what is to come, if they can read futurity in the stars, it is in vain to endeavour to elude their predictions, they must of necessity be accomplished. If the Princess of Gazna be predestined to be deceived by a man, it is in vain for any one to pretend to prevent it. 
 I was so taken up with thinking on Schirine, who I fancied to myself was handsomer than all the ladies I had seen, though at Surat and Goa I had beheld many of the most beautiful women, who had contributed not a little to ruin me. But I had a great desire to try my fortune. I will, said I, transport myself to the top of the Princess's palace,
 
and endeavour to get into her apartment. Perhaps I am the mortal, whose fortunate attempt the astrologers have seen written in the stars. 
 I was young, and by consequence heedless; I wanted not courage: I formed this rash design, and executed it immediately. I raised myself in the air, and guided my chest towards the palace. The darkness of the night was such as I could desire. I passed, without being perceived, over the soldiers heads, who being posted about the ditches, kept a strict guard. I descended upon the roof of the palace, nigh a place where I saw a light. I got out of my chest, and slipt in at a window, that was open to receive the freshness of the air, into an apartment richly furnished, where the Princess Schirine was lying on a brocaded sopha. She seemed to me of a dazzling beauty; I found her far excelling the idea I had formed of her. I went near to behold her, but I could not look on so many charms without transport; I fell on my knees before her, and kissed one of her delicate hands. She waked that instant, and perceiving a man in such a posture, was frightened. She gave a shriek, and presently her governess, who lay in the next chamber, came running to her. Mahpeiker, said the Princess, come and help me. There is a man! How got he into my apartment? Or rather, are not you an accomplice of his crime? Who I? replied the governess, your suspicion wrongs me! I am not less astonished than you, to see this audacious youth here: Besides, if I
 
 
 
 
 
would have favoured his boldness, how could I have deceived the vigilance of the guards that are about this castle? You know there are twenty steel doors to open, before any can get into this apartment; that the royal signet is upon every lock; and that the King your father has the keys: I cannot comprehend how this young man has surmounted all these difficulties. 
 While the governess was thus speaking, I thought on what I should say to them; and it came in my head to persuade them that I was the prophet Mahomet. Charming Princess, said I to Schirine, let not yourself, or Mahpeiker, be surprised to see me here; I am not one of those lovers who make use of gold, and employ every artifice to accomplish their wishes. I have no desires that your virtue need to be frightened at; far be all guilty thoughts from me. I am the prophet Mahomet. I could not, without pity, see you condemned to pass your youthful days in a prison, and I come to give you my promise, that I will secure you from the prediction which Bahaman your father is afraid of. Let him and yourself be both easy henceforth as to your future destiny, which cannot but be full of glory and happiness, since you shall be Mahomet's wife. As soon as the news of your marriage shall be spread abroad in the world, all the Kings of the earth will fear the father-in-law of the great prophet, and all the Princesses will envy your condition. 
 Schirine and her governess looked upon one another at this discourse, as if to consult what they ought to think of it. I had reason to fear, I confess, that they would not believe me; but women are apt to give into wonders. If you are the holy prophet Mahomet, said Schirine, you are pure, and free from evil intentions; you will first reconcile my father to the match, and then, on an appointed day, perform the ceremonies proper to marriage: but if you are an impostor, you will betray your wicked designs. My governess shall wait in the next apartment whenever you visit me, till this be accomplished; one shriek from me will alarm her, and she will call the guards, if your actions should shew you are not what you pretend. I answered the Princess by commending her virtue, applauding the justice of the test she proposed, and fixing on that day month for the solemnization of our nuptials, as I hoped by that time to find some lucky means of deceiving her father into the same belief. Accordingly Mahpeiker and her mistress gave credit to my story, and believed me to be Mahomet. After having passed the best part of the night with the Princess of Gazna, I went out of her apartment before it was day-light, not without promising her that I would come the following evening. I made haste to my machine, I put myself in it, and raised myself very high, that I might not be seen by the soldiers. I descended in the wood; I left my chest, and went to the town, where I bought provisions for eight days, with magnificent
 
apparel, a fine turban of Indian linen, with stripes of gold, and a rich girdle. I did not forget essences and the best perfumes. I laid out all my money in these purchases, without perplexing myself to know where I should get more: I thought I could want for nothing, after so extraordinary an adventure. 
 I staid all that day in the wood, where I employed myself in perfuming and setting myself out. When the night was come, I got into my chest, and returned to the top of the Princess Schirine's palace. I introduced myself into her apartment as the night before. The Princess declared she waited for me with much impatience. O great prophet, said she, I began already to be uneasy, and I feared you had forgot your spouse. My dear Princess, answered I, could you give way to such a fear? Since I have plighted you my troth, ought not you to be persuaded that I would love you always? But tell me, replied she, why have you so young a look? I thought that the prophet Mahomet was a venerable old man. You were not deceived, answered I, 'tis the idea you ought to have of me; and if I should appear to you such as I sometimes shew myself to the faithful, to whom I deign that honour, you would see me with a long white beard and a bald head; but I thought you would better like a form not superannuated: And, for this reason, I have borrowed the shape of a young man. The governess joining then in our discourse, told me, that I had done very
 
well; and that whoever would personate a husband, cannot appear too agreeable. 
 I went again from the castle towards the end of the night, for fear it should be discovered that I was a false prophet. I returned the next day, and behaved myself always so cautiously, that Schirine and Mahpeiker could not suspect the least deceit in me. It is true, the Princess took insensibly such a liking to me, that it contributed very much to make her believe all that I said to her. When we are favourably prepossessed, we mistrust not sincerity. 
 In a few days, the King of Gazna, attended by his officers, went to the palace of the Princess his daughter, and finding his doors all shut, and his seal on the locks, he said to his visiers that were with him, all is safe; while the doors of the palace are in this condition, I shall not fear the misfortune my daughter is threatened with. He went alone into the apartment of Schirine, who could not conceal her confusion at the sight of him. He perceived it, and was willing to know the cause of it. His curiosity augmented the Princess's confusion, who seeing herself at last obliged to satisfy him, told him all that had past. 
 You may imagine how much King Bahaman was surprized, when he understood he was Mahomet's father-in-law. Oh absurdity! cried he, Oh! my daughter, that you should be so credulous! O Heaven, I now see very plain, that it is in vain to endeavour
 
to shun the misfortunes you have reserved for us. The fate of Schirine is inevitable. A traitor has deceived her. In saying this, he rushed out of the Princess's apartment in affliction, and searched the palace from top to bottom. But his search was to no purpose, for he found no marks of discovery. At this his surprize increased. Which way, said he, did this audacious fellow get into the castle? 'Tis what I cannot conceive. 
 Then he called his visiers and his confidents. They ran at his call, and seeing him agitated, they were afraid. What is the matter, Sir? said his first Minister to him; you seem troubled. What misfortune does the concern that appears in your looks, declare to us? The King told them all he had been informed of, and asked them what they thought of the story. The Grand Visier spoke first. He said, that the intended marriage might be true, though it had the appearance of a fable. That there were some noble families in the world, who made no difficulty to ascribe their origin to such like events, and that for him he looked on the communication that the Princess had with Mahomet, as a thing very likely. 
 The other visiers, in complaisance perhaps to him that spoke first, were of his opinion: but one of the courtiers declared himself against it, in these terms; I am surprised to see sensible men give credit to a story, so little worthy of belief. How can it enter into the heads of men of sense, that our great prophet
 
should be capable of coming to seek women in this world, who in his heavenly abode is encompassed by the most beautiful ones. It is contrary to common sense; and if the King will take my advice, instead of giving ear to so ridiculous a story, he should examine thoroughly into the affair. I am persuaded, that he would presently discover the deceiver, who, under that sacred name, has the audaciousness to endeavour to seduce the Princess. 
 Though Bahaman was naturally credulous; though he took his first Minister for a man of great judgement; and though all his visiers believed that Schirine was actually betrothed to Mahomet; he declared himself nevertheless for the negative. He resolved to be informed of the truth of it; but being willing to act with prudence in this affair, and to endeavour to speak with the pretended prophet, in private, he sent his visiers and his courtiers back to Gazna. Go back, said he to them, I will stay alone to-night in this castle with my daughter. Go; but come hither to me again to-morrow. They all obeyed the King's orders. They went back to the town, and Bahaman waiting for the night, began to ask the Princess new questions. He asked her if I had eaten with her. No, Sir, said his daughter, I offered him in vain meat and drink, he would not touch them, and I never saw him take the least nourishment, nor commit the least indelicacy, since he has used to come hither. Relate to me again this adventure, replied he, and hide not from me any
 
one particular. Schirine gave him a renewed account of it, and the king, attentive to her relation, carefully weighed every circumstance. 
 In the mean while, the night came on; Bahaman sat himself on a sopha, and wax candles were lighted, and placed before him on a marble-table. He drew his scimitar to use it, if there should be occasion, to wash away in my blood the affront done to his honour. He expected me every moment, and in the expectation he was, of seeing me appear all on a sudden, I cannot believe he was without trouble. 
 It happened that night to lighten very much. A great flash chanced to dart full in the king's eyes, and made him startle. He went to the window which Schirine told him I came in at, and perceiving the air all on fire, he was much perplexed in his thoughts. Though he saw nothing that was unnatural, he could not look on those meteors, as the effects of exhalations kindled in the air; he rather believed that the flames announced to earth, the descent of Mahomet, and that the gates of heaven unfolding to let out the prophet, made the air one luminous body. 
 In the disposition the king's mind was, I presented myself without danger before that Prince. Far from shewing himself furious when I appeared at the window, he was seized with respect and fear. He let fall his scimitar, cast himself at my feet, and kissing them, said to me: O great
 
prophet, who am I, and what have I done, to deserve the honour to be your father-in-law? I judged by these words, what had passed between the king and the princess, and I found that the good Bahaman was not more difficult to be deceived than his daughter. I was charmed, to perceive that I had nothing to do with one of those penetrating heads who would have made the prophet undergo an examination that would have puzzled him. Taking advantage of his weakness, O king, said I to him, raising him up, you are of all the Mahometan princes, the most firm to my sect, and by consequence, he that ought to be the most acceptable to me. It was recorded in the Book of Fate, that your daughter should be deceived by a man; this your astrologers very truly discovered by their sublime science, but I have prayed the most High to exempt you from that mortal affliction, and to blot out this misfortune from the predestination of mankind. This he was pleased to do for my sake, upon condition that Schirine should become one of my wives. To this I consented, to recompense you for the good deeds you do every day. 
 King Bahaman was not in a condition of undeceiving himself. That weak prince believed all I had told him; and overjoyed at this alliance with the great prophet, he cast himself at my feet a second time, to shew me the sense he had of my kindness. I raised him up again, embraced him, and assured
 
him of my protection, while he could not find words to express the gratitude of his mind. 
 The next morning the visiers and the courtiers returned to the princess's palace. They asked the king if he was informed of the truth of what he desired to know. Yes, said he, I know now to what I am to trust. I have seen and spoken to the great prophet himself; he is to be my daughter's husband. Nothing is more true. Upon this the visiers and the courtiers, turning towards him that had opposed the possibility of this marriage, reproached him with incredulity; but they found him resolute in his opinion: He maintained it with obstinacy, whatever the king could say to persuade him that Mahomet was married to Schirine; till at last Bahaman became almost angry with this incredulous courtier, who was made the jest of the council. 
 The heavens conspired, as it were, to deceive the King. An accident that happened the same day, confirmed the visiers in their opinion. As they were returning to the town with their master, a storm surprised them in the plain. The lightning flashed in their faces, and the thunder roared in so terrible a manner, that they feared it was the last day. It happened that the incredulous courtier's horse took fright; he pranced, flung his master on the ground, and broke his leg with the fall. This event was looked upon as an effect of the wrath of heaven. O miserable wretch, cried the king, seeing the courtier fall, this
 
is the fruit of your obstinacy; you would not believe me, and the prophet has punished you! 
 They carried the lame courtier home, and Bahaman was no sooner returned to his palace, but he caused it to be published at Gazna, that all the inhabitants should celebrate with feasting, the day appointed for the marriage of Schirine with Mahomet. I took a walk in the town; and was informed of this news, as well as of the accident of the courtier's falling from his horse. It is not to be conceived how credulous and superstitious the people were; they made public rejoicings, and ran crying up and down, Long live Bahaman, the father-in-law of the great prophet! 
 As soon as it was night, I got to the wood again, and was presently with the princess. Charming Schirine, said I, going into her apartment, you know not what has happened to day on the plain. A courtier, who doubted that you were to be Mahomet's wife, has atoned for this doubt. I raised a tempest that frightened his horse; the courtier fell, and broke his leg. I did not think fit to carry my revenge any farther; but I swear by my tomb which is at Mecca, that if any one hereafter dares to doubt of your happiness, it shall cost him his life. After having staid some hours with Schirine, I retired. 
 The day following, the king assembled his visiers and courtiers. Let us go all together, said he to them, to ask Mahomet's pardon for the unhappy man
 
who refused to believe me, and who has received the chastisement of his unbelief. At the same they mounted their horses, and went to the princess's palace. The king himself opened the doors, which he had locked and sealed with his signet the day before. He went up, followed by his visiers, into his daughter's apartment. Schirine, said he, we are come to desire you to intercede with the prophet for a man who has incurred his wrath. I know very well what you mean, Sir, answered the princess; Mahomet has spoken to me of it. She then repeated to them what I had told her over night, and informed them that I had sworn to destroy all those who doubted of her marriage with the prophet. 
 When the good king Bahaman heard this discourse, he turned himself towards his visiers and courtiers, and said to them. Had we not hitherto given credit to what we have seen, could we, after this, disbelieve that Mahomet is my son-in-law. You find that he himself told my daughter, that he had raised the storm to revenge himself of that faithless man. All the ministers and others were convinced that she was the prophet's wife; they cast themselves before her; they humbly besought her to intercede with me in behalf of the wounded courtier; and she promised them so to do. 
 During this time, I had consumed all my provisions, and having no money left, the poor prophet Mahomet began not to know what to do. I bethought
 
myself of an expedient. My princess, said I, one night to Schirine, we have forgot to observe one formality concerning our wedding; you have brought me no portion, and that omission troubles me. Well; my dear spouse, answered she, I will speak of it to-morrow to my father, who, without doubt, will offer to you his treasures. No, no, replied I, there is no need of speaking to him of it; I value not all his riches: they are of no use to me. It will be sufficient to grant me some of your jewels; which is all the portion I ask of you. Schirine would have loaded me with all her jewels, to make her portion the handsomer; but I was contented with two great diamonds, which I sold the next day to a jeweller of Gazna. I put myself by this means in a condition to continue to personate Mahomet. 
 Just at this, time, unluckily for me, an ambassador arrived at Gazna, on behalf of a neighbouring king, to demand Schirine in marriage. He had presently audience, and when he had declared the subject of his embassy, Bahaman said to him, I am sorry I cannot give my daughter to the king your master, I have promised her to the prophet Mahomet. The ambassador judged by this answer, that the king of Gazna was mad. He took leave of that prince, and returned to his master, who believed at first, as well as he, that Bahaman had lost his senses. At length, imputing this refusal to contempt and slight, he became angry, flew to his army, and invaded the kingdom of Gazna. 
 That king, who was named Cacem, was much superior in strength to Bahaman; who moreover prepared so slowly to receive his enemy, that he could not hinder him from making a great progress. Cacem fought some troops that would have opposed his passage; he came forward with all speed towards the town of Gazna, and found Bahaman's army intrenched in the plain before the castle of the princess Schirine. The design of this provoked lover was to attack him in his intrenchments; but his troops having need of rest, and he arriving not in the plain till towards night, put off the attack till the next morning. 
 In the mean while the king of Gazna, being informed of the number and valour of Cacem's troops, began to be afraid. He assembled his council, where the courtier, who was hurt in falling from his horse, spoke in these words: "I am amazed that the king should be in the least uneasiness on this occasion; what cause of dismay can the father-in-law of Mahomet have, not only of Cacem, but of all the princes in the world put together? Your Majesty, Sir, has nothing to do but to apply yourself to your son-in-law; implore the assistance of the great prophet; he will presently confound your enemies. He can do no less, since he is the cause of Cacem's coming to trouble the repose of your subjects." 
 Though this was spoken in derision, it inspired Bahaman with confidence. You are in the right, said he to the courtier, 'tis to the prophet I ought to
 
address myself; I will pray him to drive away my haughty enemy, and I dare promise myself he will not reject my prayer. At these words he went to Schirine; daughter, said he, to-morrow morning, as soon as day appears, Cacem designs to attack us; I fear he will force our intrenchments. I am come hither to implore the assistance of Mahomet. Make use of all the interest you have with him, to engage him to defend us. Let us join in our intercessions to render him propitious to us. Sir, replied the princess, it will not be very difficult to engage the prophet on our side. He will shortly disperse the enemy's troops, and all the kings of the earth will learn, at Cacem's cost, to respect you. However, replied the king, the night is come, and the prophet does not appear. He has forsaken us! No, no, my father, replied Schirine, think not he will abandon us in necessity; he sees from heaven the army that besieges us, and, perhaps, he is this moment going to strike them with terror and dismay. 
 This was indeed what Mahomet had a great desire to do. I had all that day observed the troops of Cacem afar off. I had regarded their disposition, and above all had taken great notice of the king's quarters. I picked up great and little stones; I filled my trunk with them, and in the middle of the night I raised myself up in the air. I went towards Cacem's tents. I discovered without trouble that where the king lay, it was a very high pavilion, finely gilt, made in the form of a cupola, and supported by
 
twelve pillars of painted wood, that were driven into the ground. The intervals of the pillars were filled up with boughs of several sorts of trees twisted together. Towards the top there were two windows, one to the east, and the other to the south. 
 All the soldiers that were about the tent were asleep, which gave me an opportunity to descend to one of the windows without being perceived. I saw the king lying on a sofa, with his head on a sattin cushion. I got a little out of my trunk, and throwing a great stone at Cacem, I struck him full in the forehead, and wounded him dangerously. He gave a loud cry, which presently waked his guards and his officers. They ran to that prince; they found him all over blood, and almost senseless. They called out, the quarters took the alarm, every one asked what was the matter. The report went that the king was wounded; but they could not tell by whom. While they were inquiring out the author, I raised myself up almost to the clouds, and let fall a hail of stones upon and about the royal tent. Some soldiers were wounded, and cried out, that it rained stones. This news spread itself abroad, and to confirm it, I flung stones all about. Then a panic fear seised the whole army; the officers, as well as soldiers, believed the prophet was angry with Cacem, and that he declared his wrath by this prodigy. At last the enemies of Bahaman were struck with dismay, and fled with such precipitation, that they left their equipage and tents
 
behind them, crying, we are undone, Mahomet will destroy us. 
 The king of Gazna was very much surprised at day-break, when, instead of seeing himself attacked, he perceived that the enemy was making off. He presently pursued them with his best soldiers. He made a great slaughter of the fugitives, and overtook Cacem, whose wound hindered him from making speed. Why, said he to him, did you come into my dominions against all right and reason? What cause had I given you to make war against me? Bahaman, answered the vanquished king, I thought you had refused me your daughter in contempt and disdain, and I was resolved to revenge myself on you. I could not believe that the prophet Mahomet was your son-in-law; but I doubt it not now, since it is he that has wounded me, and dispersed my army. 
 Bahaman ceased to pursue his enemies, and returned to Gazna with Cacem, who died that day of his wound. They divided a booty which was so considerable, that the soldiers returned home loaded with riches. Prayers were made in all the mosques, to return thanks to heaven for having confounded the enemies of the kingdom; and when it was night, the king went without any attendants to the princess's palace. Daughter, said he to her, I am come to return thanks to the prophet; you have been informed, by the courier I sent you, of what Mahomet has done for us; I am so sensible of his goodness
 
to us, that I die with impatience to embrace his knees. 
 He soon had the satisfaction he desired. I entered by the usual window into Schirine's apartment, where I expected to find him. He flung himself at my feet, and kissed the ground, saying, O great prophet, no words can express the gratitude I feel. Read in my heart my acknowledgments. I raised Bahaman up, and kissed his forehead. Prince, said I, could you think I would refuse you my assistance in the ill circumstances you were reduced to for my sake? I have punished the proud Cacem, who designed to have made himself master of your dominions, and to have taken away Schirine to place her among the slaves in his seraglio. Fear not from henceforth, that any potentate in the world will dare to make war against you. If any one should have the boldness to come and attack you, I will pour on his troops a rain of fire, that shall reduce them all to ashes. 
 After having assured the king of Gazna afresh that I would take his kingdom under my protection, I told him how the enemy's army was frightened when it rained stones on their camp. Bahaman, on his part, repeated to me what Cacem had told him, and retired. That princess, who was not less sensible than the king her father of the important service I had done the state, declared to me her acknowledgments in so tender a manner, that I had very nearly forgot the time: for the day appeared as I
 
got to my trunk; but I passed so well then for Mahomet in every body's opinion, that if the soldiers had seen me in the air, they would not have been undeceived. I could hardly forbear thinking myself to be the prophet, after having routed an army. 
 Two days after, when they had interred Cacem, to whom, though an enemy, they gave a magnificent burial, the king ordered public rejoicings to be made in the city, as well for the defeat of the enemy's troops, as to celebrate solemnly the marriage of the princess Schirine with Mahomet. The morrow was the day I had appointed upon which I thought I could do no less than signalize, by some prodigy, a festival that was observed in honour of me. To this end I bought in Gazna some white pitch, and cotton-seed, together with a little steel to strike fire with. I spent the day in the wood to prepare my fire-works. I steeped the cotton-seed in the pitch; and at night, when the people were rejoicing in the streets, transported myself above the town; I raised myself as high as was possible, for fear they should discern my machine by the brighthess of my artificial flame; then struck fire, and lighted the pitch, which, with the cotton-seed, produced a wonderful effect. This done, I retired into my wood. The day appearing a little afterwards, I went into the town, to have the pleasure of hearing what they said of me. Was not deceived in my expectation; the people talked extravagantly of the trick I had played them;
 
some said it was Mahomet, who, to shew that their festival was agreeable to him, had made celestial fires appear; and others affirmed, that they saw the prophet in the middle of those new meteors, with a long white beard, and a venerable air, as they fancied. 
 All this discourse was exceedingly diverting to me; but, alas! while I was taking this pleasure, my trunk, my dear trunk, the instrument of all my wonders, was burnt in the wood. In all appearance, some spark, that I did not perceive, took hold of my machine in my absence, and consumed it. When I returned, I found it reduced to ashes. A father, who, returning home, should see his only son pierced in a thousand places, and weltering in his blood, could not be more shocked than I was. The wood echoed again with my cries and groans. I tore my hair, and rent my cloaths. I know not how I spared my own life in the rage of my desperation. 
 Thus ended my adventure with the princess Schirine, at the very time when I had nearly accomplished my plot; and which, though I was then in despair, I have since been happy to reflect that it did not proceed any further. 
 
 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 The foregoing story, my children, however extravagant and fabulous, is no bad satire upon Credulity; and may teach us, that though fear and suspicion are disgraceful, yet a proper degree of doubt
 
and circumspection are necessary, as the following little anecdote may serve to confirm. One Sunday, in the afternoon, as two ladies were knocking at a door, a very genteel looking man came up to the house, bowed, and followed them in. After some conversation, the gentleman began to wonder that his aunt did not return from church, and to suppose that the sermon must be longer than ordinary. Presently afterwards, however, the lady was heard at the door, and the gentleman instantly, with great glee, proposed a scheme to frighten the old lady, his relation: I will slip, said he, into the next room with the silver tea-kettle and lamp, so that as soon as she calls for them, to make tea, she may conclude they are stolen. This was no sooner said than done, and our dextrous hero, covering his prize with his hat, and hiding himself till the old lady was past, bade the maid let him out, and told her he should be back presently. Compliments being past, the bell was rung, and tea ordered: this set the visitors a tittering, and the old lady a wondering, but she presently found out the cause; the maid could find neither kettle nor lamp, and the ladies in the parlour were so full of the joke, that they burst out into a loud laugh. As soon as their mirth would permit, the matter was explained, the old lady's nephew mentioned, and the plot unravelled: but the catastrophe was not happy; for the tea-kettle and the nephew, as you may suppose, never made their appearance in that house again. But,
 
my children, as it is necessary we should not immediately believe every thing we hear, neither should we doubt of every thing which we cannot at first comprehend. The story of Chahabeddin, though a mere fable, is intended to correct such extreme Incredulity. 
 
 
 
 
 INCREDULITY: Or the Story of CHEC CHAHABEDDIN. 
 THE Sultan of Egypt having summoned all the learned men of his kingdom to meet on a certain day in his palace, there arose a dispute among them. It is said that the angel Gabriel, having one night taken Mahomet out of his bed, shewed him whatever is in the seven heavens, in paradise and in hell; and that the same great prophet, after having had fourscore and ten thousand conferences with the Deity, was brought back again into his bed by the same angel. Some of the doctors have advanced, that all this was done in so short a space of time, that Mahomet at his return found his bed still warm; and that he took up a pot of water, which was not yet run out, though the pot had been thrown down the very moment that the angel Gabriel carried Mahomet out of his chamber. 
 The Sultan, who presided in this assembly, maintained that this was impossible: You teach, says he, that there are seven heavens; between each of which
 
there is a distance no less than a man can well travel in five hundred years; and that each heaven is as thick as it is distant from the next to it: how then is it possible, that Mahomet, after having passed through all these heavens, and after having had fourscore and ten thousand conferences, should at his return find his bed still warm; and the pot thrown down, with the water not spilt? Who can be credulous enough to believe so ridiculous a fable? Know you not that if a pot full of water is thrown down, you will find no water in it? The literati answered, that this indeed could not naturally be; but all things were possible to the Divine Power. The Sultan of Egypt, who was obstinate, and had made it a maxim never to believe any thing contrary to reason, gave no credit to the miracle; and the learned broke up their assembly. 
 This dispute made a great noise in Egypt; and the news of it came to the ears of Chec Chahabeddin, who, for reasons not assigned in the history, could not be present at the assembly: however, he went to the Sultan's palace in the heat of the day. The Sultan, informed of the Doctor's being come, carried him into a state chamber, and spoke to him in this manner: You need not have given yourself the trouble of coming hither; it had been enough to have sent one of your servants; for we should have granted him any thing in your name: Sir, answered the Doctor, I am come in hopes of having a moment's conversation with your majesty. The
 
Sultan, who knew that this Chec was noted for behaving The contemplative cabalistical Doctors of the East are so proud, that they claim respect from their Kings. haughtily in the presence of Princes, shewed him great civilities, and made abundance of compliments. 
 The room they were in had four windows, on each side one: the Doctor desired the King to order one of them to be shut. This being done, they continued for some time in conversation; after which the Doctor desired that one of the windows, which had the prospect of a mountain called Kzeldaghi, or the Red Mountain, might be opened, and then bid the King look out. The Sultan put his head to the window, and saw on the mountain and in the plain a body of horse, more in number than the stars of heaven, armed with bucklers and coats of mail, with their swords drawn, advancing full speed towards the palace. The Prince changed colour, and in great dismay cried out, Heaven! what dreadful army is this, coming to attack my palace? Be not afraid, Sir, says the Doctor, there's nothing in it. Saying this he shut the window, and opening it again the next moment, the King looked out, but saw not a single person on the mountain, or in the plain. 
 Another of the windows gave a prospect of the city, and the Doctor opened that. The Sultan saw the city of Cairo on fire, and the flames ascending
 
even to the middle region of the air. What dreadful burning is that? exclaimed the King. See my city, my fine city of Cairo, reduced to ashes! Fear not, Sir, said the Chec, there is nothing in it. At the same time he shut the window, and opened it again, when the King saw no more of the flames. 
 The Doctor opened the third window; out of which the Sultan perceived the Nile overflowing its banks, and its waves rolling with fury to drown his palace. The King, notwithstanding what he had experienced, was terrified at this new prodigy. Alas! cried he, all is lost; we are now undone indeed. This dreadful inundation will bear away my palace, and drown me and my people! Fear not, Sir, said the Doctor, there's nothing in it. The Chec had no sooner shut and opened the window again, than the Nile appeared pursuing its course as usual. 
 He then opened the fourth window: the other wonders had not more terrified than this delighted the King. His eyes, that were accustomed to see nothing at this window but a barren waste, were agreeably surprized to behold vineyards and gardens, hung with the most delicious fruits; rivulets murmuring as they glided; whose banks were adorned with roses, narcissus' and hyacinths, at once pleasing to the sight, and fragrant to the smell; an infinite number of turtles and nightingales, straining their little throats with their sweet and mournful songs. The King, charmed with the wonders
 
which now offered themselves to his sight, believed he beheld the garden of The name of the Terrest ial Paradise, according to the Turks. Eram. What a change is this! cried he, in the excess of his admiration: O beautiful garden! charming abode! Be not so transported, said the Chec, there is nothing in it. The Doctor shut the window, then opened it again; and the Sultan, instead of these delightful phantoms, saw nothing but the desart. 
 Sir, said the Chec, I have shewn you many wonders, but all this is nothing in comparison of the astonishing prodigy, of which I will make your majesty a witness. Give your commands for a tub full of water to be brought hither. The King ordered it to be done. The tub was brought into the chamber. Be pleased, said the Doctor, to suffer yourself to be stripped, and let a towel be girt about your loins. The King consented to have his cloaths taken off; and when the towel was girt about him, Sir, said the Chec, plunge your head into the water, and draw it out again. 
 The King plunged, and in an instant found himself at the foot of a mountain on the sea-shore. This prodigy astonished him more than the others: Ah Doctor, cried he, in a transport of rage, perfidious Doctor, that hast thus cruelly deceived me! If ever I return into Egypt, from whence thou hast forced me by thy black and detestable art, I swear I will revenge myself of thee. O mayest thou miserably
 
perish! He continued his imprecations against the Chec; but, reflecting that his menaces and complaints would nothing avail him, he took courage, and went to some men whom he saw cutting wood on the mountain, resolved not to discover to them who he was. For, thought he, if I tell them I am a King, they will not believe me; they will take me for an impostor or a madman. 
 The wood-cutters asked him who he was: Good people, answered he, I am a merchant. My ship bulged on a rock, and was dashed to pieces. I have had the good fortune to save myself on a plank. You see the condition I am in, which ought to excite your pity. They were concerned for his misfortune, but the poverty of their circumstances would not allow them to grant him any relief. However, one of them gave him an old gown, and another an old pair of shoes; and when they had put him in this condition, they conducted him into their city, that was situate behind the mountain; where they no sooner arrived, than they took leave of him, and, abandoning him to Providence, went away, each to his own home. 
 The Sultan was left alone; and though men take delight in new objects, he was too much taken up with the thoughts of his adventure, to give attention to any thing he saw: he walked up and down the streets. He was weary, and, looking for a place to lie down and rest himself, stopped before the house of an old farrier, who, judging by his looks that he
 
was fatigued, desired him to come in. The King did so, and sate himself down on a bench that was near the door. Young man, said the old farrier, may I ask you what profession you follow, and what has brought you hither. The Sultan gave him the same answer he had given to the wood-cutters: I met, added he, with some good people, who were cutting wood on the mountain; and having told them my misfortune, they were so kind as to give me this old gown, and these cobbled shoes. I am glad, said the farrier, that you escaped being drowned: comfort yourself for the loss of your goods: you are young, and will not perhaps be unhappy in this city, where our laws and customs are very favourable to strangers, that come to settle among us. Do not you intend to do so? I desire nothing better, answered the Sultan, provided I could have any prospect of retrieving my affairs. Well then, replied the old man, follow the advice I am about to give you. Go this moment to the public baths of the women: set yourself down at the gate, and ask each lady that comes out, if she has a husband: she that shall answer you, No, must be your wife according to the custom of this country. 
 The Sultan, being determined to follow this advice, went to the gate of the baths. It was not long ere he saw a lady of exquisite beauty. Ah! how happy should I be, thought he to himself, if this lovely person be not married! were she but mine, I could forget my misfortunes. He stopped
 
her and said, Fair lady, have you a husband? She answered, Yes. I am sorry for it, replied the King: you would have made a fit wife for me. The lady went her way, and soon after came another, frightfully ugly: the Sultan shuddered at sight of her: What a piece of deformity is this! said he: I had rather be starved to death, than live with such a creature: I will let her pass. The old farrier, however, bid me ask the question of every lady. In all appearance the custom is so, and I must submit: how do I know but she has a husband: some unfortunate stranger, whose ill destiny has brought him hither, as mine has me, may perhaps have married her. In short, the King resolved to ask the question. She answered, Yes. 
 Next came out a third, as ugly as the other. O heavens! said the King, this is more horrible than the last: no matter; since I have begun, I must go through with it. If this have a husband, I must own there are men more to be pitied than myself. As she was passing him, he addressed her, and trembling, said, Fair lady, are you married? Yes, young man, answered she, without stopping. I am glad of it, replied the Sultan. I bless my stars, continued he, that I am free of these two women. But it is not yet time to rejoice: all the ladies are not come out of the baths; nor have I yet seen her that is destined for me. Perhaps I shall get nothing by the change. 
 A fourth appeared, who surpassed in beauty the first, that he thought so charming: What difference, cried he; there is not so much disparity between day and night, as between this fine woman and the two last! Are angels and devils to be seen in the same place? He advanced to her with eagerness. Lady, said he, have you a husband? She answered, No; looking on him with as much disdain as attention; then went away, leaving him in deep surprize. What am I to think of this, says he: the old farrier has certainly jeered me. If, according to the laws of this country, I am to marry this lady, why did she leave me so rudely? Why put she on that haughty and disdainful air? She viewed me from head to foot; and I saw in her looks the marks of contempt and scorn. The truth is, she is not much in the wrong. In justice I cannot blame her. This threadbare gown, full of holes, is not over proper to engage a lady's heart. I forgive her for thinking she may chance to mend herself. 
 While thus reflecting, a slave accosted him: Sir, said he, I am sent to find a stranger in tatters; and, by your air, methinks it should be you. If you please to give yourself the trouble of following me, I will lead you to a place, where you are expected with great impatience. The Sultan followed the slave, who led him to a great house, and shewed him into an apartment elegantly furnished. He bid him wait. The Sultan staid full two hours without seeing
 
a soul but the slave, who every now and then came and desired him not to be impatient. 
 At length came in four ladies, who accompanied another, glittering in jewels, but yet more resplendent in beauty. The Sultan cast his eyes upon her, and recollected her to be the last lady that he had seen coming out of the bath. She drew near him: Forgive me, Sir, said she, that I have made you wait. I was loth to appear in my undress before my lord and master. You are in your own house, all you see here belongs to you: you are my husband: command me what you please, I am ready to obey. Madam, answered the Sultan, not a moment ago I complained of my destiny, but now I am the most happy of men. But since I am your husband, why did you just now look so disdainfully upon me? You were shocked, perhaps, at the sight of me; and, to confess the truth, I could not much blame you. Sir, replied the lady, I could not do otherwise; the women of this city are obliged to carry themselves haughtily in public: it is the custom. Well, said the King, since I am master here, in order to exercise my little sovereignty, let somebody bring me a taylor and a shoemaker: I am ashamed to be seen in your presence in this tattered gown, and these cobbled shoes, which ill suit with the rank I have hitherto held in the world. I have taken care of that already, replied the lady: I have sent a slave to a Jew, who sells cloaths ready made, and who will furnish you at once with all you want:
 
mean while let us take some refreshment. In saying this, she led him to a table covered with all sorts of fruits and sweat-meats. While they were eating, the four attendant ladies, who stood behind, sung songs, and played on several instruments; their mistress took a lute, and accompanying the music with her voice, charmed the Sultan. 
 The concert was interrupted by the Jew tradesman, with bundles of cloaths of different sorts. They made choice of a white sattin vest, flowered with gold, and a gown of purple. The lady admired the King; was very well satisfied to have found such a husband; and he well pleased to have met with so beautiful a wife. 
 He had lived seven years with this lady, by whom he had several sons and daughters. But both of them taking delight in expensive life, they outrun the lady's estate, were obliged to put away their waiting ladies and slaves, and to sell their furniture for subsistence. The Sultan's wife, seeing herself reduced to want, told her husband; "As long as my estate lasted, you never spared it: it behoves you now to think of some way or other to maintain your little family." 
 These words struck the King, who went to the old farrier to ask his advice. O my father, says he, I am now in a worse condition, than when I came first to this city: I have a wife and children, and nothing for their subsistence. Young man, replied the aged farrier, were you not brought up to trade?
 
The Sultan answered, No. The farrier put his hand in his pocket, and giving him two  Aqtcha is a coin of the value of a penny.  Aqtchas, bid him immediately buy himself some  Ypes are cords that porters use instead of a knot.  Ypes, and wait in the place where the porters plied. The Sultan bought them, and went to ply among the porters. 
 Scarce was he arrived, when a man asked him if he would carry a burthen? I am here for that purpose, answered the Sultan. The man loaded him with a great sack, which the King had much ado to carry, and the cords wrung the skin off his shoulders. He received his pay of one Aqtcha, and carried it home. His wife, seeing no more money, told him, that if he earned not ten times as much every day, his family must starve. 
 The next morning, overwhelmed with grief, instead of plying among the porters, he walked to the sea-side, reflecting on his miserable condition. There he looked very earnestly on the place, and, recalling to mind his strange and fatal adventure, he sunk into tears. The ceremony of The Mahometans wash their bodies before they say their prayers.  Ablution being indispensible before prayers, he plunged himself into the sea; and raising his head out of the water, (what astonishment!) he found himself again in his own palace, in the middle of the tub, and surrounded by all his officers. O barbarous Doctor, cried he,
 
perceiving the Chec upon the very spot on which he had left him, dost thou not dread that God will punish thee, for having played this trick with thy Sultan and thy master? Sir, said the Chec, why is your majesty angry with me? You but this moment plunged your head into this water. I tell you nothing but the truth: if you do not believe me, ask your officers, who were eye-witnesses of it. The Sultan gave no credit to them. It is full seven years, said he, that this cursed Doctor has detained me in a foreign country by the force of his enchantments; I married, and had children; but it is not of this I complain so much, as of my being a porter. Oh villainous Chec! couldst thou be so cruel as to make me carry Ypes: Sir, replied the Doctor, when you came into this apartment, did not you leave the beautiful Sultaness, Zeineb, in the pangs of child-birth? Yes, said the Sultan. Lo! said Chahabeddin, here comes an officer to salute thee a father, but to inform thee likewise that the Prophet has punished thy infidelity, Zeinib is dead. As the Chec finished this sentence, the room shook with thunder, the learned Chahabeddin disappeared, and left the Sultan to lament his charming Zeneib, and his want of faith. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DIALOGUE XIV. 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 THE subject which I have selected for this day's reading is of so much importance to your present and future conduct, that I must intreat you all to listen with more than ordinary attention. 
 Truth is the first duty of man, the greatest of moral virtues, and the strongest bond of social affection. Whoever possesses truth must, of necessity, be virtuous; for he will possess that permanent and unshaken veracity which will not admit the least equivocation, or mental reservation, that steady sincerity which will rather submit to the shame of an indiscreet, or even the punishment of a wrong action, than the greatest of all disgrace, the meanest of all vices, lying. It is easy to conceive that a man who resolutely persists in being sincere in telling the exact truth, and the whole truth, though, by such conduct, he must at some times publish his own weakness, will become exceedingly circumspect and watchful over himself. Shame is a very powerful and severe sensation, and few would be hardy enough to venture on a wrong action with a certainty of its becoming public. A determined adherence to truth will, therefore, prevent both vice and folly, and whoever can teach sincerity, will, at the same time, teach many other virtues. 
  Strong minds alone are capable of that inflexible veracity of which I speak; and wherever this is found, we need not hesitate to pronounce the possessor to be among the first of men. Observe therefore, children, whosoever of you gives me the most repeated proofs of plain, full, and unequivocal sincerity, will, at the same time, give me the most undoubted assurance of superior capacity, and become most honoured, most respected, and most beloved. 
 The fidelity and truth of the philosopher Xenocrates were such, that the Athenians, when he gave evidence, would not suffer him to be sworn; his word alone was sufficient. This, my children, is true, substantial, and everlasting fame. 
 When the Duke of Ossura was at Barcelona, he went on board one of the gallies, and having the privilege of releasing any of the prisoners which had been sent there for crimes and misdemeanors, he began to question them, in order to discover who most deserved his pity. All were anxious to excuse themselves, by attributing their punishment to the malice of their enemies, or the injustice of the magistrates, excepting one man, who, when the Duke asked what was the reason of his being there, replied, "I was sent here, Sir, very deservedly; I committed a robbery upon the highway near Saragossa. It is true I was not only starving myself, but had a wife and family in the same condition. However, I was guilty of the fact, and deserve my punishment." "Why, hey-day! said the Duke;
 
here's an impudent fellow indeed! How dare you intrude into the society of such honest worthy men? Here, knock off this fellow's irons. Get away, you rascal; and, do you hear, never more let me find you in such innocent company." "No, God bless your Grace," said the poor fellow; "that I will be answerable you never shall." 
 I quote these particulars to exemplify this great point, videlicet, that truth is not only virtuous but politic. The Orientals had a law, that whoever was three times convicted of speaking falsely, was condemned, under pain of death, never to speak again; but continue in silence and reproach during life: so utterly did they detest falsehood, and so convinced were they of its pernicious consequences. And believe me, my children, though lyars are permitted the use of their tongues, their punishment is little inferior among us; for whoever is three times detected in lying by any person of veracity, will never be credited by that person again. Listen, children, to the story of Saddyq, and learn wisdom. 
 
 
 
 
 TRUTH: Or the Story of SADDYQ. 
 TOGALTIMUR-CAN, King of Tartary, was one day told that there was, in his dominions, a man who was so great an enemy to lying that he always told truth. The King had a mind to have
 
him near his person, and made him Master of the Horse. A courtier of so extraordinary a character soon found enemies, who watched all opportunities to ruin him: but the King, who was not easily to be imposed on, and who trusted to his own judgement, made trial of his Master of the Horse on several occasions, and having always found him frank and sincere, gave him the surname of Saddyq, or the Teller of Truth. 
 Of all Saddyq's enemies, the Visier Tangribirdi was the most inveterately bent on his ruin. He employed all sorts of stratagems to disgrace him in the mind of Togaltimur: but not being able to compass his design, he disclosed one day to his daughter Hoschendan the uneasiness it gave him to be still disappointed. How unfortunate am I! said he to her: I have been the cause of the disgrace of a thousand old courtiers; yet I cannot destroy this man, who, though but newly settled at court, triumphs over all my efforts to ruin his fortune. Hoschendan, who equalled her father in malice, instead of exhorting him no longer to oppose the good fortune of Saddyq, said to him, My dear father, cease to afflict yourself: if you are absolutely determined to bring Saddyq into the King's disfavour, leave the care of it to my management. Ah! replied the visier, what method will you take to compass it? Ask me not that, Sir, said she, give me leave only to go to the Master of the Horse, and I promise you I will bring him to a necessity of telling a lie to the King. Do whatever
 
you will, daughter, said the visier, I give you free leave. Provided you prove as good as your word, no matter what it costs. 
 Hoschendan was wholly intent to prepare herself for the execution of the project she had formed. She cloathed herself in her richest apparel, and adorned herself with all her jewels. In short, after having added to her natural beauty all the advantages that art could give, she went from her father's one night, attended by some slaves, who convoyed her safely to Saddyq's house. When she was arrived, she sent back her slaves, knocked at the door, and told the servant that she desired to speak with Saddyq about an affair of very great importance. They conducted her into his apartment. She found him sitting on a sopha, approached him, threw off the veil that covered her face, and sat down on the same sopha, without saying one single word. 
 Saddyq who had never seen, not even in a dream, so beautiful a person, was struck to the heart, and became motionless. The lady, whose design was to inspire him with love, spared not the means to accomplish it. She caressed him with a thousand dalliances; and said, O Saddyq, be not surprised that a woman who loves you, thus seeks for you in private. Grant me a single favour. Soul of my soul! cried out the Master of the Horse, you need only name it. What can I refuse to these powerful charms, of which I am so enamoured? Command your slave tell him what you wish. I have a mind,
 
replied Hoschendan, with a longing desire to eat some horse-flesh Horse-flesh is a great dainty among the Tartars; so likewise is the milk of mares. . Kill me immediately the fattest of all the King's horses: take out the heart and the liver, get them roasted, and let us eat them together. Charming lady, answered Saddyq, rather ask me my life: I have a respect for every thing that belongs to the King my master. Let us put off this frolick till to-morrow: I will then buy a horse as fat as a bacon-hog, and we will regale ourselves like Princes. No, no, replied Hoschendan, I must eat of one of the King's horses: it is a fancy I have taken, and you must gratify it. I cannot comply with your request, said Saddyq: I love the King my master too well to give him the least uneasiness. Should I prove so weak as to yield to your request, I am certain he would not fail to punish me. You need not fear that, said Hoschendan; should the King ask you what was become of the horse, say, that having found him sick, and past all hope of recovery, you thought it best to kill him, lest he should have infected the other horses with his disease. The King, who by way of excellence has given you the surname of Saddyq, will take your word for it, and even commend your precaution. 
 The Master of the Horse began to waver What shall I do? said he to himself. On the one hand, my respect for the King, and the fear of punishment, keep me in awe: on the other, the charms of this
 
heavenly face allure me. Hoschendan, perceiving the perplexity he was in, renewed her attacks so forcibly that he condescended at length to her request. They went together to the King's stables. O my Prince! said Hoschendan to Saddyq, since you grant me the favour, grant it to my wish; pray cut the throat of this black horse, which stands here apart from the rest. O my Queen! my Sultaness! cried the Master of the Horse, you know not what you ask. You put my love to too severe a trial. This black horse is of all others that which the King loves best. It is impossible for me to comply with your desire. Pitch upon any one of the rest, and his throat shall be cut instantly. This is all that I can do for you; and, indeed, all that you ought to expect. But the lady was not to be refused: on the contrary, throwing herself at his feet, O my Prince! said she, my dear Master of the Horse, I conjure you not to refuse my suit. I know well that the proof of tenderness, which I ask of you, clashes in some measure with your duty: but women, you know, are whimsical and capricious; whatever they ardently desire, they are obstinate to obtain: comply therefore, and satisfy my humour. I will for ever love you, and hold you dearer than my life. 
 Her words were accompanied with so many marks of tenderness, and such transports, that the Master of the Horse could resist no longer. He drew his knife, and cut the black horse's throat instantly.
 
Then taking out the heart and liver, they were roasted, and ate in the bed-chamber. In the morning the lady took leave of the Master of the Horse, returned home to her father, and told him all that had passed. The visier was so overjoyed at it, that he had no time to think how dear it had cost his daughter to play the part she had acted; but went directly to the palace, and told the King the adventure. He took care, however, not to say that Hoschendan was the lady in question, or that it was to satisfy his hatred and envy that his daughter had dared to tempt the integrity of Saddyq. 
 While the visier Tangribirdi was making this recital to the King, with all the malice of a stanch courtier, who wished ruin to his enemy, the Master of the Horse had come to himself, and made most bitter reflections on what he had done. How void of sense are men, said he, to give themselves up to their passions! I should have done much better to have sent away the lady with a flat denial, than to have pleased her in killing a horse that was the delight of the King my master. I should not then have been agitated with all the cruel thoughts which now disturb my quiet. What shall I answer to the King when he asks me for his horse? I, who hitherto have made it a law to myself ever to tell truth, shall I fly to falsehood for shelter, and shall I dare to be found a liar in the presence of my King? This would be adding a new crime to that I have committed. On the other hand, should I make a true
 
confession, my sincerity must cost me my life: what then must I determine to do? To lie? Well, be it so. Let me suppose that I am at court: let me suppose this cap (taking it off his head, and laying it on the floor) to be Togaltimur: let me see if I can have the confidence to insist upon a lie in the face of the King. Entering into his presence, I salute him. Saddyq, says he, let my black horse be got ready, I mean to ride to-day. Sir, an accident has befallen him: yesterday in the evening he would eat nothing we could offer him, and he died at midnight; nor can I imagine the occasion of his death. How! my black horse, that carried me so well but yesterday is he dead? Why must it be him rather than so many others that are in the same stable? What story is this thou tellest me? Be gone; thou art a liar. Thou hast either fold my horse, or else thou hast killed him in some freak. Think not to escape my vengeance. Thou shalt be punished according to thy deserts. One of you stab that villain to the heart this moment; hack him in pieces. 
 Togaltimur, pursued Saddyq, will, no doubt, speak to me in this manner; and such will be the reward of the first lie I ever told in my life. Now let me consider, if, by telling the truth, I shall fare any better. Saddyq, let my black horse be got ready: I will ride abroad. O King! you see your servant in the deepest affliction. There came to my house last night a lady, who asked me to have the heart and liver of that horse, and I had no power to refuse
 
her. What! could you kill my fine horse to gain a lady's favour? One of you go for the executioner; he shall do his office before my face. 
 Behold, said the Master of the Horse, what reception I am to expect: whether I lie, or whether I tell truth, I am sure to lose my life. Wretch that I am! Cursed be the object whose charms have thrown me into this perplexity. While he was busied with these dismal thoughts, came one to tell him the King would speak with him. He instantly obeyed the order, and found there the visier his enemy. 
 Master of the Horse, says the King, I intend to hunt to-day: saddle me the black horse. Struck with a mortal dread, he answered in confusion Sir, there happened last night a misfortune to your servant; if your Majesty commands me, I will tell it you. Tell it, replied the King. Last night, said the Master of the Horse, as I was sitting in my chamber, there came to me a lady in a veil. She sat herself down by me on a sopha, unveiled, and shewed me a neck and face of ravishing beauty: she won my affection; and prevailed on me to promise her the heart and liver of your black horse. I answered without hesitation, that I could not consent to kill a horse that your Majesty was so fond of. But the lady threw herself at my feet, and besought me in terms so moving, that I had no power to resist her importunity. This, Sir, is an ingenuous recital of my adventure. I confess my crime, and am so far from desiring to escape the
 
punishment I deserve, by telling a lie, that I come of my own accord to submit to it. There, Sovereign, is the sabre, here is my head. 
 The King turned towards the visier, and asked him in what manner he thought it best to deal with Saddyq. Sir, answered the visier, overjoyed to be consulted in this affair, I am of opinion, that he ought to be burnt in a slow fire. A man, who has dared to sacrifice to his pleasure a horse that you were fond of, is unworthy of mercy. I am not of your opinion, visier, replied Togaltimur: I think it more reasonable to pardon a first fault, than to punish it. Then addressing his discourse to the Master of the Horse, said, O Saddyq! I am astonished at thy sincerity, and excuse thy weakness. Had I been in thy place, I might not only have given my black horse, but all the horses in my stables. The allurements were too mighty to be resisted: no man could have been safe against them. I forgive thee the death of my horse; and take it so well of thee, that thou hast told me the truth on this occasion, that I order a robe of honour to be brought for thee immediately. 
 When the visier Tangribirdi saw that the Master of the Horse was rewarded, instead of being punished, he was seised with a melancholy, that threw him into an illness, of which he died in a few days, and the fortunate Saddyq was made choice of to succeed him in his post of Visier. 
 
 
 
 
 
 NANCY. 
 Upon my word I began to tremble for poor Saddy{que} I am quite happy that he did not tell a lie. 
 
 
 EUSTACE. 
 I never could be thoroughly persuaded that he would sister, though I own I was once almost in doubt. 
 
 
 CHARLES. 
 Well, I hope I shall never be put to such a severe trial. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Rather hope, Charles, that you shall obtain sufficient fortitude to support such a trial. 
 
 
 MRS. EGERTON. 
 The tale you have just heard, my dears, points out to you both the magnanimity and the advantages of speaking truth. But you must look further; you must not only avoid inventing direct lies, but equivocal ones likewise. They are equally disgraceful, equally guilty, and oftentimes equally fatal in their consequences. These you must particularly guard against. Remember, though nobody should detect you, though you should pass with impunity in the eyes of others, yet if you can reproach yourselves
 
with the least deviation from veracity, you ought to be ashamed of your conduct, to shrink from the recollection of your weakness, and to take the most effectual and positive method of preventing it in future. Remember too, it is very possible for you to be guilty of lying without speaking a word. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 I recollect reading an account of the behaviour of Colonel Edmonds, who served in the Dutch wars at Utrecht, which will teach you how you ought to act on the like occasion. As he was one day standing among his brother officers, one of his countrymen who had just arrived from Scotland, and who wanted to insinuate himself into the Colonel's favour, came up to him, saluted him, and delivered pretended messages from my Lord his father, from the Earl his cousin, and various others of his relations, all of whom, he said were well. "Gentlemen, said the Colonel, turning to his friends, do not believe that fellow; my father is a poor baker in Edinburgh, and works hard for his livelihood. I am neither related to lord or knight. He has made an impudent attack upon my vanity, and has wanted to engage me tacitly to become an accomplice in his falsehoods, for which contemptible trick, every gentleman who has heard him, must, I am sure, despise him." 
 I can never repeat too often to you that the plain truth is best. When some young men were brought before Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, and accused of
 
having libelled him, Pyrrhus asked them, "Is it true, young men? did you say such things?" "We did, Sir, replied one of the youths; and I am afraid we should, at that time, have said many more if we had had more wine." No denial of the fact, no evasive answers could have pleaded so effectually as the simple truth. Pyrrhus admired the sincerity, was sensible of the force of the defence, and readily pardoned the error of the offenders. 
 We will now read the history of Lady Forrest, which is a melancholy but strong instance of the danger of equivocation. 
 
 
 
 
 EQUIVOCATION. The History of Lady FORREST, &c. 
 CHARLOTTE and Maria were educated together at an eminent boarding-school near London: there was little difference in their age, and their personal accomplishments were equal: but though their families were of the same rank, yet as Charlotte was an only child, she was considerably superior in fortune. 
 Soon after they were taken home, Charlotte was addressed by Captain Freeman, who, besides his commission in the guards, had a small paternal estate: but as her friends hoped for a more advantageous match, the Captain was desired to forbear his visits, and the lady to think of him no more. After some
 
fruitless struggles they acquiesced; but the discontent of both were so apparent, that it was thought expedient to remove Miss into the country. She was sent to her aunt, the Lady Meadows, who with her daughter lived retired at the family seat, more than one hundred miles distant from the metropolis. After she had repined in this dreary solitude from April to August, she was surprised with a visit from her father, who brought with him Sir James Forrest, a young gentleman who had just succeeded to a baronet's title and a very large estate in the same county. Sir James had good nature and good sense, an agreeable person and an easy address: Miss was insensibly pleased with his company; her vanity, if not her love, had a new object; a desire to be delivered from a state of dependance and obscurity had almost absorbed all the rest: and it is no wonder that this desire was gratified, when scarce any other was felt; or that in compliance with the united solicitations of her friends, and her lover, she suffered herself within a few weeks to become a lady and a wife. They continued in the country till the beginning of October, and then came up to London, having prevailed upon her aunt to accompany them, that Miss Meadows, with whom the bride had contracted an intimate friendship, might be gratified with the diversions of the town during the winter. 
 Captain Freeman, when he heard that Miss Charlotte was married, immediately made proposals of marriage to Maria, with whom he became acquainted
 
during his visits to her friend, and soon after married her. 
 The friendship of the two young ladies seemed to be rather increased than diminished by their marriage; they were always of the same party both in the private and public diversions of the season, and visited each other without the formalities of messages and dress. 
 But neither Sir James nor Mrs. Freeman could reflect without uneasiness upon the frequent interviews which familiarity and confidence had produced between a lover and his mistress, whom force only had divided; and though of these interviews they were themselves witnesses, yet Sir James insensibly became jealous of his lady, and Mrs. Freeman of her husband. 
 It happened in the May following, that Sir James went about ten miles out of town to be present at an election of a member of parliament for the county, and was not expected to return till the next day. In the evening his lady took a chair and visited Mrs. Freemen: the rest of the company went away early, the Captain was upon guard, Sir James was out of town, and the ladies after supper sat down to piquet, and continued the game without once reflecting upon the hour till three in the morning. Lady Forrest would then have gone home; but Mrs. Freeman, perhaps chiefly to conceal a contrary desire, importuned her to stay till the Captain came
 
in, and at length, with some reluctance, she consented. 
 About five the Captain came home, and Lady Forrest immediately sent out for a chair: a chair, as it happened, could not be procured; but a hackney coach being brought in its stead, the Captain insisted upon waiting on her ladyship home. This she refused with some emotion; it is probable that she still regarded the Captain with less indifference than she wished, and was therefore more sensible of the impropriety of his offer: but her reasons for rejecting it, however forcible, being such as she could not alledge, he persisted, and her resolution was overborne. By this importunate complaisance the Captain had not only thrown Lady Forrest into confusion, but displeased his wife: she could not, however, without unpoliteness oppose it; and left her uneasiness should be discovered, she affected a negligence which in some degree revenged it: she desired that when he came back he would not disturb her, for that she should go directly to bed; and added with a kind of drowsy insensibliity, "I am more than half asleep already." 
 Lady Forrest and the Captain were to go from the Haymarket to Grosvenor-square. It was about half an hour after five when they got into the coach; the morning was remarkably fine, the late contest had shaken off all disposition to sleep, and Lady Forrest could not help saying, that she had much rather take a walk into the Park than go home to bed. The
 
Captain zealously expressed the same sentiment, and proposed that the coach should set them down at St. James's Gate. The lady, however, had nearly the same objections against being seen in the Mall without any other company than the Captain, than she had against its being known that they were alone together in a hackney coach: she, therefore, to extricate herself from this second difficulty, proposed that they should call at her father's in Bond-street, and take her cousin Meadows, whom she knew to be an early riser, with them. This project was immediately put in execution; but Lady Forrest found her cousin indisposed with a cold. When she had communicated the design of this early visit, Miss Meadows intreated her to give up her walk in the Park, to stay till the family rose, and go home after breakfast: "No, replied Lady Forrest, I am determined upon a walk; but as I must first get rid of Captain Freeman, I will send down word that I will take your advice." A servant was accordingly dispatched to acquaint the Captain, who was waiting below, that Miss Meadows was indisposed, and had engaged Lady Forrest to breakfast. 
 The Captain discharged the coach; but being piqued at the behaviour of his wife, and feeling that flow of spirits which usually returns with the morning even to those who have not slept in the night, he had no desire to go home, and therefore resolved to enjoy the fine morning in the Park alone. 
 Lady Forrest not doubting but that the Captain would immediately return home, congratulated herself upon her deliverance; but at the same time, to indulge her desire of a walk, followed him into the Park. 
 The Captain had reached the top of the Mall, and turning back, met her before she had advanced two hundred yards beyond the palace. The moment she perceived him, the remembrance of her message, the motives that produced it, the detection of its falsehood, and discovery of its design, her disappointment and consciousness of that very situation which she had so much reason to avoid, all concurred to cover her with confusion which it was impossible for her to hide: pride and good-breeding were, however, still predominant over truth and prudence; she was still zealous to remove from the Captain's mind any suspicion of a design to shun him, and therefore with an effort perhaps equal to that of a hero who smiles upon the rack, she affected an air of gaiety, said she was glad to see him, and as an excuse for her message and her conduct, prattled something about the fickleness of woman's mind, and concluded with observing that she changed her's too often ever to be mad. By this conduct a retreat was rendered impossible, and they walked together till between eight and nine: but the clouds having insensibly gathered, and a sudden shower falling just as they reached Spring-gardens, they went out instead
 
of going back; and the Captain having put the lady into a chair, took his leave. 
 It happened that Sir James, contrary to his first purpose, had returned from his journey at night. He learnt from the servants that his lady was gone to Captain Freeman's, and was secretly displeased that she had made this visit when he was absent; an incident which, however trifling in itself, was by the magic of jealousy, swelled into importance: yet upon recollection, he reproved himself for this displeasure, since the presence of the Captain's lady would sufficiently secure the honour of his own. While he was struggling with these suspicions, they increased both in number and strength, in proportion as the night wore away. At one he went to bed; but he passed the night in agonies of terror and resentment, doubting whether the absence of his lady was the effect of accident or design, listening to every noise, and bewildering himself in a multitude of extravagant suppositions. He rose again at break of day; and after several hours of suspence and irresolution, whether to wait the issue, or go out for intelligence, the restlessness of curiosity prevailed, and about eight he set out for Captain Freeman's; but left word with his servants, that he was gone to a neighbouring coffee-house. 
 Mrs. Freeman, whose affected indifference and dissimulation of a design to go immediately to bed, contributed to prevent the Captain's return had, during his absence, suffered inexpressible disquiet:
 
she had, indeed, neither intention to go to bed, nor inclination to sleep; she walked backward and forward in her chamber, distracted with jealousy and suspense, till she was informed that Sir James was below, and desired to see her. When she came down, he discovered that she had been in tears; his fear was now more alarmed than his jealousy, and he concluded that some fatal accident had befallen his wife; but he soon learnt that she and the Captain had gone from thence at five in the morning, and that he was not yet returned. Mrs. Freeman, by Sir James's enquiry, knew that the lady had not been at home: her suspicions, therefore, were confirmed; and in her jealousy, which to prevent a duel she laboured to conceal, Sir James found new cause for his own. He determined, however, to wait with as much decency as possible, till the Captain came in; and perhaps two persons were never more embarrassed by the presence of each other. While breakfast was getting ready, Dr. Tattle came to pay Mrs. Freeman a morning visit; and to the unspeakable grief of both the lady and her guest, was immediately admitted. Doctor Tattle is one of those male gossips who, in common opinion, are the most diverting company in the world. The Doctor saw that Mrs. Freeman was low spirited, and made several efforts to divert her, but without success: at last he declared, with an air of ironical importance, that he could tell her such news as would make her look grave for something; "The Captain, says he,
 
has just huddled a lady into a chair at the door of a bagnio, near Spring-gardens." He soon perceived that this speech was received with emotions very different from those he intended to produce; and therefore added, "that she need not, however, be jealous; for notwithstanding the manner in which he had related the incident, the lady was certainly a woman of character, as he instantly discovered by her mein and appearance:" this particular confirmed the suspicion it was intended to remove; and the Doctor finding that he was not so good company as usual, took his leave, but was met at the door by the Captain, who brought him back. His presence, however insignificant, imposed some restraint upon the rest of the company; and Sir James, with as good an appearance of jocularity as he could assume, asked the Captain "What he had done with his wife?" The Captain, with some irresolution, replied, that "he had left her early in the morning at her father's; and that having made a point of waiting on her home, she sent word down that her cousin Meadows was indisposed, and had engaged her to breakfast." The Captain, who knew nothing of the anecdote that had been communicated by the Doctor, judged by appearances that it was prudent thus indirectly to lie, by concealing the truth both from Sir James and his wife: he supposed, indeed, that Sir James would immediately enquire after his wife, at her father's, and learn that she did not stay there to breakfast; but as it would not follow that
 
they had been together, he left her to account for her absence as she should think fit, taking for granted that what he had concealed she would also conceal for the same reasons; or if she should not, as he had affirmed nothing contrary to truth, he might pretend to have concealed it in jest. Sir James, as soon as he had received this intelligence, took his leave with some appearance of satisfaction, and was followed by the Doctor. 
 As soon as Mrs. Freeman and the Captain were alone, she questioned him with great earnestness about the lady whom he had been seen to put into a chair. When he had heard that this incident had been related in the presence of Sir James, he was greatly alarmed lest Lady Forrest should increase his suspicions, by attempting to conceal that which, by a series of enquiry to which he was now stimulated, he would probably discover: he condemned this conduct in himself, and as the most effectual means at once to quiet the mind of his wife, and obtain her assistance, he told her all that had happened, and his apprehension of the consequences: he also urged her to go directly to Miss Meadows, by whom his account would be confirmed, and from whom she might learn farther intelligence of Sir James; and to find some way to acquaint Lady Forrest with her danger, and admonish her to conceal nothing. 
 Mrs. Freeman was convinced of the Captain's sincerity, not only by the advice which he urged her
 
to give to Lady Forrest, but by the consistency of the story and the manner in which he was affected. Her jealousy was changed into pity for her friend, and apprehension for her husband. She hasted to Miss Meadows, and learnt that Sir James had enquired of the servant for his lady, and was told that she had been there early with Captain Freeman, but went away soon after him: she related to Miss Meadows all that had happened, and thinking it at least possible that Sir James might not go directly home, she wrote the following letter to his lady: 
 
 My dear Lady Forrest, 
 I am in the utmost distress for you. Sir James has suspicions which truth only can remove, and of which my indiscretion is the cause. If I had not concealed my desire of the Captain's return, your design to disengage yourself from him, which I learn from Miss Meadows, would have been effected. Sir James breakfasted with me in the Hay-market; and has since called at your father's, from whence I write: he knows that your stay here was short, and has reason to believe the Captain put you into a chair some hours afterwards at Spring-gardens. I hope therefore, my dear lady, that this will reach your hands time enough to prevent your concealing any thing. It would have been better if Sir James had known nothing, for then you would not have been suspected; but now he must know
 
all, or you cannot be justified. Forgive the freedom with which I write, and believe me most affectionately 
 Your's, MARIA FREEMAN. 
 
 P. S. I have ordered the bearer to say he came from Mrs. Fashion the milliner. 
 
 
 This letter was given to a chairman, and he was ordered to say he brought it from the milliner's; because if it should be known to come from Mrs. Freeman, and should fall by accident into Sir James's hands, his curiosity might prompt him to read it, and his jealousy to question the lady without communicating the contents. 
 Sir James being convinced that his lady and the Captain had passed the morning at a bagnio, by the answer which he received at her father's, went directly home. His lady was just arrived before him, and had not recovered from the confusion and dread which seized her when she heard that Sir James came to town the night before, and at the same instant anticipated the consequences of her own indiscretion. She was told he was then at the coffee-house, and in a few minutes was thrown into an universal tremor upon hearing him knock at the door. He perceived her distress not with compassion but rage, because he believed it to proceed from the consciousness of guilt: he turned pale, and his lips quivered; but he so far restrained his passion as to ask her, without
 
invective, "where, and how she had passed the night?" She replied, "at Captain Freeman's; that the Captain was upon guard, that she sat up with his lady till he came in, and then insisting to see her home, she would suffer the coach to go no farther than her father's, where he left her early in the morning:" she had not fortitude to relate the sequel, but stopped with some appearance of irresolution and terror. Sir James then asked, "if she came directly from her father's home." This question, and the manner in which it was asked, increased her confusion: to appear to have stopped short in her narrative, she thought would be an implication of guilt, as it would betray a desire of concealment: but the past could not be recalled, and she was impelled by equivocation to falsehood, from which, however, she would have been kept back by fear, if Sir James had not deceived her into a belief that he had been no farther than the neighbourhood. After these tumultuous reflections which passed in a moment, she ventured to affirm, that "she staid with Miss Meadows till eight, and then came home:" but she uttered this falsehood with such marks of guilt and shame, which she had indeed no otherwise than by this falsehood incurred or deserved, that Sir James no more doubted her infidelity than her existence. As her story was the same with the Captain's, and as one had concealed the truth, and the other denied it, he concluded there was a confederacy between them; and determining first to bring the Captain to account, he
 
turned from her abruptly, and immediately left the house. 
 At the door he met the chairman who had been dispatched by Mrs. Freeman to his lady; and fiercely interrogating him what was his business, the man produced the letter, and saying, as he had been ordered, that he had brought it from Mrs. Fashion, Sir James snatched it from him, and muttering some expressions of contempt and resentment, thrust it into his pocket. 
 It happened that Sir James did not find the Captain at home; he, therefore, left a billet, in which he requested to see him at a neighbouring tavern, and added, that he had put on his sword. 
 In the mean time, his lady, dreading a discovery of the falsehood which she had asserted, dispatched a billet to Captain Freeman; in which she conjured him, as a man of honour, for particular reasons, not to own to Sir James, or any other person, that he had seen her after he had left her at her father's: she also wrote to her cousin Meadows, intreating, that if she was questioned by Sir James, he might be told that she staid with her till eight o'clock, an hour at which only herself and the servants were up. 
 The billet to Miss Meadows came soon after the chairman had returned with an account of what had happened to the letter; and Mrs. Freeman was just gone in great haste to relate the accident to the Captain, as it was of importance that he should know it before his next interview with Sir James: but the
 
Captain had been at home before her, and had received both Sir James's billet and that of his lady. He went immediately to the tavern, and, inquiring for Sir James Forrest, was shewn into a a back room one pair of stairs: Sir James received his salutation without reply, and instantly bolted the door. His jealousy was complicated with that indignation and contempt, which a sense of injury from a person of inferior rank, never fails to produce; he, therefore, demanded of the Captain, in a haughty tone, "Whether he had not that morning been in company with his wife, after he had left her at her father's?" The Captain, who was incensed at Sir James's manner, and deemed himself engaged in honour to keep the lady's secret, answered, that "from what he had said in the morning, no man had a right to suppose he had seen the lady afterwards; that to insinuate the contrary, was obliquely to charge him with a falsehood; that he was bound to answer no such questions, till they were properly explained; and that as a gentleman, he was prepared to vindicate his honour." Sir James justly deemed this reply an equivocation and an insult; and being no longer able to restrain his rage, he cursed the Captain as a liar and a scoundrel, and at the same time striking him a violent blow with his fist, drew his sword, and put himself in a posture of defence. Whatever design the Captain might have had to bring his friend to temper, and reconcile him to his wife, when he first entered the room, he was now
 
equally enraged, and indeed had suffered equal indignity; he, therefore, drew at the same instant, and after a few desperate passes on both sides, he received a wound in his breast, and reeling backward a few paces, fell down. 
 The noise had brought many people to the door of the room, and it was forced open just as the Captain received his wound: Sir James was secured, and a messenger was dispatched for a surgeon. In the mean time the Captain perceived himself to be dying; and whatever might before have been his opinion of right and wrong, and honour and shame, he now thought all dissimulation criminal, and that his murderer had a right to that truth which he thought it meritorious to deny him when he was his friend; he, therefore, earnestly desired to speak a few words to him in private. This request was immediately granted; the persons who had rushed in withdrew, contenting themselves to keep guard at the door; and the Captain, beckoning Sir James to kneel down by him, then told him, that however his lady might have been surprized or betrayed by pride or fear into dissimulation or falsehood, she was innocent of the crime which he supposed her solicitous to conceal. He then briefly related all the events as they had happened; and at last, grasping his hand, urged him to escape from the window, that he might be a friend to his widow and to his child, if its birth should not be prevented by the death of its father. Sir James yielded to the force of this motive, and escaped as
 
the Captain had directed. In his way to Dover he read the letter which he had taken from the chairman, and the next post inclosed it in the following to his lady. 
 
 My dear Charlotte, 
 I am the most wretched of all men; but I do not upbraid you as the cause: would to God that I were not more guilty than you! We are the martyrs of dissimulation. By dissimulation dear Captain Freeman was induced to waste those hours with you, which he would otherwise have enjoyed with the poor unhappy dissembler his wife. Trusting in the success of dissimulation, you was tempted to venture into the Park, where you met him whom you wished to shun. By detecting dissimulation in the Captain, my suspicions were increased; and by dissimulation and falsehood you confirmed them. But your dissimulation and falsehood were the effects of mine; your's were ineffectual, mine succeeded: for I left word that I was gone no farther than the coffee-house, that you might not suspect I had learned too much to be deceived. By the success of a lie put into the mouth of a chairman, I was prevented from reading a letter which at last would have undeceived me; and by persisting in dissimulation, the Captain has made his friend a fugitive, and his wife a widow. Thus does insincerity terminate in misery and confusion, whether, in its immediate purpose, it succeed, or be disappointed. O my dear
 
Charlotte! if ever we meet again, to meet again in happiness is impossible if ever we meet again, let us resolve to be sincere: to be sincere is to be wife, innocent, and safe. We venture to commit faults which shame or fear would prevent, if we did not hope to conceal them by a lie. But in the labyrinth of falsehood, men meet those evils which they seek to avoid. As in the strait path of truth alone they can see before them, in the strait path of truth alone they can pursue felicity with success. Adieu! I am dreadful! I can subscribe nothing that does not reproach and torment me Adieu! 
 
 Within a few weeks after the receipt of this letter, the unhappy lady heard that her husband was cast away in his passage to France. 
 
 
 
 
 
 DIALOGUE XV. 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 YESTERDAY you beheld me very anxious to convince you of the absolute necessity of a strict adherence to truth. I cannot, perhaps, better continue to effect this, than by shewing you the importance of accustoming yourselves to silence, when
 
upon the affairs of others. This will insensibly give you habits of secresy, and teach you to avoid detraction, two very essential duties of society. We will begin with the first. To shew you how highly the wisest of men have always reverenced those who were careful not to betray the secrets with which they were entrusted, I will remind you of the behaviour of Papyrius, and the honour conferred on him in consequence of it, by that august assembly, the Senate of antient Rome. 
 It was once the custom for the senators to take their sons with them to the senate-house, and among these did Papyrius Praetestatus follow his father. One day when an affair of great consequence had been in debate, and deferred till the morrow, a particular charge was given to all not to mention it abroad. The mother of the boy, Papyrius when he came home, asked him what the senators had been doing that day; to which he replied, it was a secret that must not be disclosed. This answer, instead of giving satisfaction, as it ought to have done, only enflamed her curiosity; and, when entreaties had no effect, made her proceed to violence, in order to extort the secret. Papyrius, who was quite young, finding it impossible to prevail, told her at last, that he might avoid disclosing the secrets of the senate, "it had been debated, whether it would be most advantageous for one man to have two wives, or for one woman to have two husbands." The mother upon this immediately quits Papyrius, and
 
running about among her female acquaintance, who were as weak as herself, persuades them to accompany her the next day to the senate. The senators, hearing the uproar, enquired what was the matter? Upon which Papyrius stood up, and told them in what manner he had been obliged to act. The fathers were all so much surprized and pleased with the invention, the resolution, and the secresy of the boy, that they returned him public thanks; but instantly made a decree, that the sons of senators should not in future be admitted to hear their deliberations, Papyrius alone excepted. 
 Papyrius you see, children, notwithstanding his youth, had a just sense of the dignity and importance of the trust which had been placed in him by the senators. The person whose story we will now read, had neither his prudence nor his fortitude. 
 
 
 
 
 SECRESY: Or the ENRAGED LOVER. 
 A YOUNG gentleman, descended of a good family, but whose estate was very much encumbered by the mismanagement of his parents, was on the point of retrieving his fortune by a marriage with a lady, who, besides eight thousand pounds in her own possession, was the only child of one of the most wealthy merchants in Bristol. 
 The courtship between them had been kept extremely secret; the lady had made no one her confidante
 
in the affair; the gentleman had observed the same caution, till, a few days before that which she had appointed for the completion of their mutual wishes, he imparted the secret of his approaching happiness to a friend, from whom before he had never concealed any thing. 
 This person had a wife whom he extremely loved, and whose integrity he doubted not. He knew she wished well to his friend, and that she would rejoice to hear of the good fortune he was so near enjoying, therefore communicated the secret to her almost as soon as he was informed of it himself; but charged her at the same time to make no mention of it, which she faithfully promised. 
 It proved, however, that her mind had no such retentive quality as her fond husband imagined. A young lady of her acquaintance happening to visit her that same day, and some discourse on the ill situation of the intended bridegroom's affairs coming on the tapis, the wife could not forbear crying out, 'Well, well, we shall soon see him redeem all.' 'As how!' demanded the other. 'By a marriage with some great fortune,' replied she. 'Marriage!' resumed the young lady, 'It must then be with some worn out virgin of fourscore at her last prayers.' 'Not so, I can assure you,' said the wife, 'but a blooming young creature of scarce eighteen, with a fortune of eight thousand pounds in her own hands, and heiress to one of the first merchants of Bristol.' 'You amaze me,' returned
 
the other, 'Pray who is she?' 'You must excuse me for that, my dear,' answered she, 'I am enjoined secresy; but I can tell you, the wedding will be celebrated in a few days, and then all will come out. In the mean time you may have leave to guess.' 
 After what she had said, the other could not be much at a loss to discover the person spoken of. 'You certainly must mean Miss ****. The description you give corresponds with no other woman in this town.' 'You are perfectly right,' replied she; 'but be sure you tell nobody.' 
 Little did this unhappy wife imagine, to whom she had blabbed so dangerous a secret. This lady had been courted by the gentleman in question, but, her fortune not agreeing with his circumstances, the match did not succeed. She had loved him, and her resentment for his not resolving to suffer every thing for her sake, was adequate to the tenderness she had before had for him; and the opportunity now given her for rendering him as unhappy as he had made her, filled her with an ill-natured satisfaction. 
 She no sooner got home, than she wrote an anonymous letter to the father of her rival, acquainting him with the whole story of his daughter's intended marriage. The old gentleman was equally surprized and enraged; he searched his daughter's cabinet, and found letters which confirmed the truth of the advice he had received. He immediately locked the young lady into her chamber, suffering no one
 
to come near her, but an aunt, who was as inflexible to compassion for the woes of love, as a Spanish Duenna. On the third day, which was agreed upon by the lovers for the celebration of their nuptials, he sent her to a place, where it was pretty certain she could hold no correspondence unknown to him. 
 Some hours before her departure, she found means to write to her lover. The contents of the letter were these: 
 
 The day, which I thought should have given me to you, tears me from you for ever; the communication between us, by some means, is discovered to my father, and I am to be sent to banishment; but to what part, or whether out of the kingdom, am not able to inform you; I only find, by the preparations making, that I am going a long journey. I am carefully watched, and have just time to bid you eternally farewel, and that you must now give over all expectations of my ever being your's 
 
 P. S. As I find the discovery of our loves has been made to my father by a letter from an unknown hand, I wish the misfortune may not be owing to yourself, in having trusted some person unworthy of the secret, since it has never escaped my lips, even to the faithful servant who brings you this, and will inform you of all my sufferings for these three cruel days. Once more adieu, I shall always wish you happy. 
 
 
 The poor lady had but just time to instruct her maid what she should say on the delivery of this letter, when, though it was no more than four o'clock in the morning, she was called down stairs, and, accompanied by her aunt, hurried into a coach, and carried, no one in the family knew whither. 
 The maid about six executed her commission. The distraction of the lover, on hearing the account, and reading the letter, may more easily be conceived than described; he knew he had made but one confident, and therefore it must have been that confident, by whom he was betrayed. He flew directly to his house, roused him from his bed, and cried out with a voice scarce intelligible through rage and despair, 'You have undone me; I believed you my friend, and a man of honour; you have basely wronged my credulity, and are a scoundrel and a villain!' 
 The other, knowing this was the day agreed on for the marriage, had imagined that he had been called upon to be witness of it; but was now so much surprized, that he had no power to make the least reply. The lover threw down the letter he had just received from Miss ****, and went on, 'Read that, and, if you can borrow effrontery enough from hell, deny your perfidy, your base abuse of friendship!' 
 The gentleman looked at the letter in the utmost consternation, was extremely sorry for the accident,
 
but certain it had not happened through his fault; adding, that he had never mentioned the affair to a single soul but his wife, whose fidelity he could depend upon. 
 If anything could have added to the lover's fury, it must have been the acknowledgment made by the other, of having told the secret to his wife. 'You have ruined all the hopes I had on earth,' pursued the lover, 'your blood is the only atonement you can make!' With these words he drew his sword, the other did the same, they exchanged several thrusts; the clash of their weapons presently brought the servants into the room, but not time enough to prevent both the antagonists from being wounded. 
 The wife, on this dreadful alarm, jumped out of bed, and, with only a loose night-gown about her, came running in, crying, 'What has occasioned this shocking scene!' 'I hope,' replied her husband, 'that you yourself have not occasioned it; and that you never mentioned what I told you in relation to this gentleman's courtship with Miss ****?' 'Oh Heavens!' returned she, 'is it on this score that you fight?' 'Answer not one question with another,' resumed he fiercely, 'but speak the truth at once.' 
 She then confessed, that, in chatting with Miss L , she had unwarily dropped some hints in regard to that affair, and that the other had guessed the rest. 'It is mighty well,' said the despairing
 
lover; 'the discovery is made, and I am no longer to seek for the author of that cruel letter, which has undone me; I know the resentment Miss L has to me, and must own, you could not have taken more effectual measures to compleat my ruin.' 
 The husband, who felt more smart from his wife's confession, than from the wounds he had received, was beginning to reproach her in the most bitter terms, when he was interrupted by the entrance of a surgeon, who had been sent for by the servants, to whom turning, he said, 'You see here, Sir, two persons who have need of your help; but I desire you will first examine the condition of my friend.' This complaisance the other was far from returning, he would not suffer himself to be touched, saying, he would receive no assistance in a house, the owners of which had so basely betrayed him; and with these words flew down stairs, bleeding as he was. 
 Fortunately, however, neither of their wounds proved mortal, nor even dangerous, and both were soon cured; but the friendship between them was never again cemented, though the husband, conscious of having been the aggressor, frequently endeavoured it. This disunion with a person whom he truly valued, made the folly, which occasioned it, appear in its worst colours; and, though he continued to live with his wife, he never could bring himself either to love or even to behave towards her as before this accident. 
 As for the lover, having sought his mistress in every place he could think of, without being able to get any intelligence of her abode, he retired to the southern parts of France, in order to retrieve his affairs, by living cheap. The young lady, as it was afterwards known, had been carried into Wales, where labouring under the weight of her father's displeasure, the disappointment of her love, and the deprivation of all those satisfactions her youth had been accustomed to, she fell into a languishing disorder, which soon took her from the world. 
 
 
 
 
 NANCY. 
 To be able to keep a secret, Sir, is certainly a very necessary duty; but, I observe, that the want of secresy is always attributed to the poor women. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 You mistake, my dear; in the instance before us the men were weaker than the women. The young lady kept her own secret; and had either her lover, or his friend, had the same discretion, they might have been happy. 
 
 
 NANCY. 
 Would not you have a husband, Sir, freely communicate his thoughts to a wife? 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 By no means, if these thoughts are concerning others; he has no right so to do. Metellus, a very
 
wise man, said, that if he thought his shirt was privy to his designs, he would tear it off, and burn it. 
 
 
 MRS. EGERTON. 
 Indeed, that wife must very ill understand her duty, who makes improper enquiries; and she must be exceedingly weak, should she think herself neglected, because such enquiries meet a repulse from her husband. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 We will now proceed to another consequence of not keeping a guard upon the tongue, Detraction. I need not take much trouble to convince you of the meanness of this folly, which, if once indulged, degenerates into detestable vice. But though you may perceive its ill effects, and behold it with contempt in others, if you be not very careful, you may easily fall into it yourselves. There is no weakness more common, nor more catching, than Detraction; yet there is not any one more universally decried. However, there is no making you avoid this odious practice by maxims alone; if you have not a mind superior to detraction, you will infallibly become detractors; and if you have, nothing but a long experience can give you the power to remain totally innocent in this respect. But remember, that there is no ill quality which more effectually lowers the character of the possessor, or which more certainly turns to his own disadvantage. Let us attend to the following Fable: 
 
 
 
 
 
 The HERDSMAN. A FABLE. 
 A certain herdsman verified the maxim that 'every man may acquire a character in his station.' His reputation, which was the result of honesty and plain sense, made him considerable in his village. All men confided in his word. Matters of property in dispute were deposited in his hands, till the cause was decided. His benevolence of temper disposed him always to reconcile animosities, and his strength of understanding qualified him for a right decision, whenever his neighbours appointed him arbitrator. 
 As a clear sky gradually dispels black clouds, and enlightens the whole hemisphere; so the report of a good name extends to remote parts, and is universally well received. The King, who at that time ruled over the country, was a mild and judicious Prince. He dispensed his favours impartially to men of merit. He sent for the herdsman, tried his honesty at one time, and his understanding at another; and, as the latter improved, he raised him from one employment to another, till our herdsman arrived, without artifice or ambition, as it were with the wings of a gentle breeze, to the highest pitch of fortune; and had such weight and authority, that no resolution of consequence was taken, without previously consulting him. Good counsel is the compass, by which a Prince steers his course. Whilst he follows that, all his measures succeed; which was the case here. The King was in no
 
danger, for he was beloved. The people rested in peace, for the labourer was secure of his pay. Innocence was free from anxiety, for she could rely upon protection. Vice only trembled, for she was prosecuted; and envy sat watching and disturbed by her side, for virtue was crowned by fortune. 
 It happened, during this general tranquillity, that an aged man, who had formerly an intimacy with the herdsman, returned home after a distant journey. His first inclination was to see the court, in order to worship that sun which diffused so fruitful a warmth over all the country. He was not a little surprized to see the herdsman exalted to the King's right hand; while the herdsman, whose mind continued invariably the same, rejoiced, in the midst of his grandeur, at the arrival of his friend. 
 In the evening, when they were retired to private conversation, the old experienced man thought himself obliged to admonish his friend. "You are now, said he, in the slippery road of honour, and resemble the blind man, who in searching for the staff he had lost, among stones and bushes, picked up a serpent stiff with cold. A prudent traveller, who was passing by, advised him to throw it away; but the unhappy blind man rejected his counsel, and thought himself happy in a safe support; till the serpent was refreshed, and bit him mortally. Your own good sense, continued he, will enable you to make the application." 
 The herdsman was somewhat affected by the story, but being conscious of no evil himself, and not apprehensive of any design against him, persevered in the faithful and diligent discharge of the duties of his office. He might have continued in the same to the day of his death, had not the artful practices of the envious, after several far-fetched attempts, at last succeeded to render him suspected by the King. Their first pretence was, that the herdsman had built himself a sumptuous house, by extorting money from the poor, and gratifications from the rich. The King was determined to believe no eyes but his own, in a matter which concerned the reputation of an honest man. He made a visit to the herdsman, and surveyed his dwelling, but found neither the building, nor the decorations, nor the furniture unequal to his station, nor the expence greater than consisted with the liberal rewards himself had conferred upon him. The herdsman was therefore commended for not disgracing his rank, and for administering to the laborious part of mankind that support, which they have a right to expect from men of power and fortune. The King summoned the envious accusers, and remonstrated to them on the falsity of their charge. They invented another falsehood to excuse the former; for no iniquity is so fruitful as this; one deceit begets another, unless the first be stifled in its birth. "It is very true, Sir, said they, he is cautious of exposing his treasures to public view; but there is a chest by his
 
bed-side, filled with gold and jewels; which contain more property than all your subjects possess." The King, being a lover of truth, repaired once more to the herdsman's dwelling. He found the chest, and commanded him to open it; the herdsman begged to be excused, assuring him that it contained nothing worthy of any one's curiosity; but the King's suspicions were heightened by the earnestness with which he declined the order. The chest was opened, and what can you imagine were the contents? No more than a plain herdsman's coat, and a staff stripped of its bark. The herdsman, upon this, deposited his fine cloaths in the chest, and, recollecting his friend's fable of the blind man and the serpent, put on his former dress, walked to his native home, and could not be prevailed with, by the intreaties or promises of the King, to depart from his resolution of finishing his days in the cottage where he had drawn his first breath. 
 
 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 In this fable you may perceive detraction was the child of envy; and so will it ever be. A lesson which you may learn from the story of Dorantes. 
 
 
 
 
 DETRACTION: Or the Story of DORANTES. 
 A certain gentleman whose real name I shall conceal under that of Dorantes, was married to a
 
young lady of equal birth and fortune, and who, without being a celebrated beauty, was perfectly agreeable. He behaved with great tenderness towards her, she was passionately fond of him; no couple could live more happily together, till an unlucky propensity, to which women are too prone, dissolved the cement of their union, and made both as wretched as before they had been blessed. 
 The wife of Dorantes was extremely intimate with a young widow, to whom I shall give the name of Clara; they were acquainted in their childhood, and the change of their conditions afterwards had made no alteration in the sentiments of either. Seldom two days passed, without their seeing each other; and, as Dorantes staid pretty much at home, he was very glad of a third person to make up a party for ombre. 
 Clara was very handsome, had a regular set of features, fine hair, fine teeth; and, above all, a remarkably delicate complexion. Dorantes had several times, occasionally, mentioned those perfections in her to his wife; which, though, as will appear by the sequel, they not a little displeased her, she seemed not to take notice of, till one day, as they were talking together on the beauty of some ladies of their acquaintance, he said, "Well, I see none that are half so agreeable as your friend Clara." "Clara looks very well altogether, replied she gravely; but it costs her a great deal of pains to do so." "What pains," cried he. "Why, to tell
 
you the truth, resumed she, all those things you admire in her are nothing but mere art; she has seven or eight false teeth, to my knowledge; then, as to her hair it is naturally inclined to red; but she dyes it with a certain water, which turns it to that fine black it now appears; and, for her complexion, she uses both white and red; besides, she always sleeps in a night-mask, to repel pimples." "Impossible, my dear!" resumed he, "I have eyes as well as you, and can easily distinguish between what is natural and what is artificial." 
 "You men are often deceived in these things, answered she; if you were to see her in a morning, you would be convinced of the truth of what I tell you, and a great deal more; but I love Clara, and would not, for the world, say what I have done to any one, except yourself." "You are in the right, said he with some ill humour; for no-body would believe you, if you did." 
 "I am sorry, then, I ever mentioned it to you said she a little haughtily." "It might have been better you had not, replied he sternly; because it gives me no very favourable idea, either of your generosity or your sincerity; and but confirms what I have often heard of your sex; that no one woman ever spoke well of the beauty of another." With these words, he snatched up his hat, and went directly out of the house. 
 The wife, who had never before been spoken to in this sharp manner by her husband, now, doubtless,
 
repented of what she had said; but the words were gone out of her mouth, she could not call them back; and pride and shame would not suffer her to confess she had been guilty of uttering a falsity. From this time forward, she perceived a visible decay in that tenderness and respect with which she had been treated by Dorantes, and began to hate the innocent Clara for a misfortune which she had intirely brought upon herself; she behaved to her with great coldness, and, at length, ordered her servants to say she was not at home, whenever she came. The fair widow, on this, discontinued her visits; and, as she knew she had done nothing to deserve the usage she received, thought it beneath her to inquire into the cause. 
 From what small beginnings do, sometimes, the greatest feuds and discontents arise! Dorantes, finding that Clara did not come to the house as usual, doubted not but that his wife had either personally affronted her, or spoke of her, to others, in the same manner she had done to him; and, reflecting deeply on the injustice of the thing, could not keep himself from entertaining a secret contempt, mixed with indignation, for the author. 
 Chance contributed to heighten in him this ill humour towards his wife: he met Clara one day by accident, and, accosting her with his accustomed politeness, asked the reason why his wife had been so long deprived of her agreeable company. To which she very gravely replied: That she had made
 
several visits, none of which being returned, she could not flatter herself that her company was any longer acceptable. "Oh, madam, said he, I beg you will not so far wrong your own merits, or our just sense of them, as to harbour such a thought. I am extremely sorry for my wife's remissness; but I suppose she depended on the intimacy between you for an excuse. I hope you will have good-nature enough to forgive it, and convince us, that you do so, by letting us see you soon." "Sir, answered she, when your lady thinks fit to let me know that she will be at home, I shall wait on her." She concluded with a curtsey, and turned so hastily away, that he had no opportunity of adding any thing further. 
 On his return home, he repeated what had passed to his wife; and added, that, as he found there was no pretence for breaking off the acquaintance, he would have her send an invitation to her. Her complexion grew red as scarlet on the first mention of Clara's name; and, when he had given over speaking, "I do not understand what she means, said she, by giving herself these airs; I never forbad her my house, and, if she thinks fit to stay away, I have no reason to intreat her presence; yet, since I find it will so much oblige you, I shall send to her." "Oblige me!" cried he in an angry tone. "Yes! since you interest yourself so far in this affair." This put him beyond all patience. He told her, that she behaved very ill; that she discovered
 
a mean disposition; and that, if she persisted in it, she would render herself unworthy either of love or respect. 
 "I see, cried she, that I have forfeited both with you; but it is not to my disposition, it is to Clara's more prevailing charms, that I am indebted for so great a misfortune. Ungrateful, inconstant man! Is this the return for all the tender affection I have had for you?" 
 Men can ill bear reproaches, especially when innocent of the cause, as Dorantes really was. He replied in the most bitter terms, which, she being unable either to endure or retort, half-suffocated her with rage. She flew into the garden, and, throwing herself upon a green bank at the further end, there gave a loose to her tears and complainings. 
 One of the maids, happening to be at a window, saw where she lay, and had the discretion to run hastily down and remind her, that, some rain having lately fallen, the dampness of the earth might endanger her health. The poor lady was as cold as marble; though the inward agitations she was in, hindered her from feeling any exterior inconvenience. She rose, however, and went into her chamber, but fell into such violent agitations, as obliged her to go to bed, where she continued very ill the whole night. 
 Dorantes came home very late, and, being told that his wife was indisposed, slept in another chamber.
 
On hearing, in the morning, that she was much worse, he sent immediately for a physician, who attended the family. 
 He found her in a fever, and delirious; all that could be done for her was in vain; her distemper every hour increased, and, in two days, her life was despaired of. On the third, she seemed, to all appearance, better; the violence of her fever abated, and her senses were perfectly restored. Alas! the cruel disease had left the outward frame only to prey with greater force upon the nobler parts. Death had now seized her, she was sensible of it, and asked if Dorantes was at home. Being told he had lately left her chamber, she desired he would come in again; which he presently did. 
 He had no sooner seated himself on her bedside, than she made a sign to those who were in the room to withdraw; and then, taking hold of his hand, said to him: "My dear Dorantes, I feel I am no longer for this world, but cannot leave it without confessing, that I have been guilty of the greatest injustice to Clara. Yet was it not malice that made me so: I endeavoured to make her odious in your eyes, only because I feared she had appeared too amiable. It was a fault indeed, but it was the fault of love; as such, forgive it." "It was a weakness, answered he, which I was sorry to observe in you; for, upon my honour, I never had a thought of Clara, or any other woman, to the prejudice of that affection I have vowed to you." "How kind
 
is this assurance! cried she, it gives me pleasure, even in death." "Talk not of death! interrupted he, tenderly embracing her; live, oh live, and be as happy as a husband's love can make you!" "It is too late," said she; and, that instant, falling into strong convulsions, sunk under them. 
 
 
 
 
 
 DIALOGUE XVI. 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 IN the commerce of life, there is a mutual confidence requisite, my children, between man and man. To be too credulous is a weakness, but to be too suspicious is fordid and contemptible. If we have proved a person's fidelity in a single instance, it would be mean and unjust ever to suspect him, unless he obliges us to it; but if after a long intercourse no cause of distrust arises, but many of punctuality and sincerity, to doubt is then to deserve treachery. When the Emperor Trajan was told that his most dear friend Surra had formed a conspiracy against his life, he went the same evening, uninvited, attended only by two friends, and supped with him; was shaved by his barber, and consulted his physician.
 
When he returned, he was again cautioned. Trajan smiled, and told them they did not know the man; he did: to prove that he did, he had actually put himself in Surra's power, and returned, as he knew he should, safe and unhurt. Thus, instead of meanly suspecting the man whose love and friendship he had had so many proofs of, he shortly after made him Tribune; and when, according to custom, he delivered the naked sword, he said, "I give you this, my friend, to defend me, if I rule well; if not, to dispatch me." 
 But it is not every person in whom you must place such absolute confidence: few only are worthy of the sacred name of Friend, and those few cannot be respected too highly, cannot be cherished too intimately. Once well assured of a friendship like this, no doubt should be made of its capability to do or suffer all things. That friend, who makes a difficulty even of death itself in the cause of honourable friendship, is unworthy the name. 
 Eudamidas, Aretaeus, and Charixenus, were friends; the two latter were rich, the former exceedingly poor. Eudamidas died, and left the following will: "To Aretaeus I bequeath my mother, to be kept and fostered in her old age. My daughter to Charixenus, to be married, with a dowry as great as he can afford. But if, in the mean time, death should happen to either of these men, my will is, that the survivor shall perform what the other should have done, had he lived." The poverty of the testator
 
was known, the duties of friendship were but little understood, and those who heard the will of Eudamidas departed, laughing at the legacies which Aretaeus and Charixenus were to receive. But those to whom the bequests were made, had different sensations; they came, acknowledged, and ratified the will. Charixenus died within five days, and Aretaeus, who had taken the mother of Eudamidas, immediately sent for the daughter likewise, educated her, bestowed her in marriage, and of the five talents which his estate amounted to, gave two to her, and two to his own daughter, and had their nuptials both celebrated in one day. 
 Such are the duties and privileges of friendship, such are the obligations you enter into, when you say to any one, I AM YOUR FRIEND. If, therefore, you should ever rashly make such a profession, and find yourselves unequal to the character, instantly recede; it is more honourable than to deceive: go and say to whoever your pretensions may have imposed upon, "I release you from your obligations, and must intreat the same of you: I feel my weakness, and am sorry to find myself unworthy to be a friend." 
 
 
 EUSTACE. 
 I think, Sir, I could rather suffer death than betray my friend. 
 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 I should have a very indifferent opinion of you, Eustace, if at your age you did not think so: however, you know I think very highly of you. We have declared a friendship for each other, and I can give you no greater proof of my esteem. As we are both under an obligation of openness and sincerity, of having no reserved pleasures, no partialities of which the other is ignorant, I am not afraid that you will form any improper friendships, because I am certain you would first consult me, as I always consult you, when there is any thing on my mind in which either of us is interested. 
 
 
 EUSTACE. 
 I am sensible, Sir, of the honour you do me, and have often felt the benefit of so near and dear a friend. I should, indeed, be unworthy, if I concealed the least thought from you. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 I am satisfied, my Eustace, of your sincerity, and the generous confidence you repose in me. I shall now be obliged to you, if you will read this Arabian anecdote. It is the picture, children, of men worthy to be friends. 
 
 
 
 
 
 FRIENDSHIP: An ARABIAN ANECDOTE. 
 ALI-IBN-ABBAS, favourite of the Caliph Mamoun Mamoun, son of the Caliph Aroun-Alrachid. His name is famous all over the East; and he is reckoned the greatest prince of the Abbaffidies family. He reigned twenty-eight years and eight months. He was a great warrior, of a sweet disposition, and liberal to excess; but what most immortalized him, was his love of learning. He was himself deeply versed in every science, but more especially in philosophy and astronomy. This is the prince that caused the most valuable books to be translated from the Greeks, their first masters. The Mahometan doctors have reproached him with introducing philosophy, and the other speculative sciences, into Mahometanism; for the Arabians of his days were not accustomed to read any other books but what related to their own religion. This prince shewed equal favour to every man of knowledge, let his religion be what it would. The question about the creation, or eternity, of the Alcoran, was started in his time, and occasioned much effusion of blood. He, with the smallest number of doctors, held it to be created. But the other doctors insisted, that the Alcoran being the word proceeding from God, was eternal like himself: this sentiment is embraced by the present Mahometans, who consider all that deny that doctrine as infidels. , and lieutenant of the police in the reign of this prince, relates, in these terms, a story that happened to himself. "I was one evening with the caliph, when a man, bound hand and foot, was brought in. Mamoun ordered me to keep a watchful eye over the prisoner, and to bring him the next day. The caliph seemed greatly irritated; and the
 
fear of exposing myself to his resentment induced me to confine the prisoner in my haram, as the most secure place in my house. 
 "I asked him what country he was of. He said, Damascus; and that his habitation was in the quarter of the great mosque. May heaven, cried I, shower down the choicest of its blessings upon the city of Damascus, and particularly upon the quarter where you resided! He was solicitous to know the motive that so much interested me for that district. It is, said I, that I owe my life to a man that lived there. 
 "Those words excited his curiosity, and he conjured me to gratify it. It is many years since, continued I, that the caliph, dissatisfied with the viceroy of Damascus, deposed him. I accompanied the person whom the prince had appointed his successor; and at the instant we were taking possession of the governor's palace, a quarrel broke out between the new and the old governor; the latter had posted soldiers, who assaulted us: I escaped out of a window, and, finding myself pursued by other assassins, took shelter in your quarter. I observed a palace open, and seeing the master at the door, supplicated him to save my life. He immediately conducted me into the apartment of his women, where I continued a month in peace and plenty. 
 "My host came one day to inform me, that a caravan was setting out for Bagdad; and that, if I wished to return to my own home, I could not avail
 
myself of a more favourable opportunity. Shame held my tongue; and I had not courage to confess my poverty; I had no money, and, for want of that, should be forced to follow the caravan on foot. But how great was my surprize, when, on the day of departure, a very fine horse was brought me, also a mule loaded with all sorts of provisions, and a black slave to attend me on the road! My generous host presented me at the same time with a purse of gold, and conducted me himself to the caravan, where he recommended me to several of the travellers, who were his friends. These are the kindnesses I received in your city, and that render it so dear to me: all my concern is, that I have not hitherto been able to discover my generous benefactor. I should die content, could I find an opportunity of testifying my gratitude. 
 "Your wishes are accomplished, cried my prisoner in a transport, I am he that received you in my palace. Do you not remember me? The time that had elapsed since that event, and the grief into which he was sunk, had greatly altered his face: but, on a more close examination of his features, I easily recollected him; and some circumstances he brought to my mind, left me not the least room to doubt but that the prisoner, who was then in danger of losing his life, was the very person who had so generously saved mine. I embraced him with tears in my eyes, took off his chains, and asked him by what fatality he had incurred the caliph's displeasure.
 
Some contemptible enemies, he replied, have found means to asperse me unjustly to Mamoun: I was hurried away from Damascus, and cruelly denied even the consolation of embracing my wife and children: I know not what fate attends me; but as I have reason to apprehend my death is determined, I request you to acquaint them with my misfortunes. 
 "No, said I to him, you shall not die; I dare give you this assurance; you shall be restored to your family; be at liberty from this moment. I presently provided some pieces of the richest gold stuffs of Bagdad, and begged him to present them to his wife: depart immediately, added I, presenting him with a purse of a thousand sequins; haste to rejoin those precious pledges of your affection which you left at Damascus; let the caliph's indignation fall on me; I dread it not, if I am happy enough to preserve you. 
 "What a proposal do you make me! answered my prisoner; and can you think me capable of accepting it? What! shall I, to avoid death, sacrifice that same life now, which I formerly saved? Endeavour to convince the caliph of my innocence: this is the only proof I will admit of your gratitude: if you cannot undeceive him, I will go myself and offer him my head: let him dispose of my life at his pleasure, provided your's be safe. I again entreated him to escape, but he continued inflexible. 
 "I did not fail to present myself the next morning before Mamoun. The prince was dressed in a
 
crimson coloured mantle, the symbol of his anger. As soon as he saw me, he enquired where my prisoner was? and at the same instant ordered the executioner to attend. My lord, says I, throwing myself at his feet, something very extraordinary has happened with regard to the person you yesterday committed to my custody. Will your majesty permit me to explain it? These words threw him into a passion. I swear, cried he, by the soul of my ancestors, that thy head shall pay for the prisoner, if thou hast suffered him to escape. Both my life and his are at your majesty's disposal: vouchsafe to hear me. Speak, said he. I then related to the prince, in what manner that man had saved my life at Damascus; that, desirous to discharge the obligation I lay under to him, I had offered him his liberty; but that he had refused it, from the fear of exposing me to death. My lord, added I, he is not guilty; a man of such generous sentiments cannot be so. Some base detractors have calumniated him to you; and he is become the unfortunate victim of their hatred and envy. The caliph appeared affected, and having naturally a greatness of soul, could not help admiring the conduct of my friend. I pardon him, said Mamoun, on thy account: go, carry him this good news, and bring him to me. I threw myself at the prince's feet, kissed them, and made my acknowledgments in the strongest terms my gratitude could suggest: I then conducted my prisoner into the caliph's presence. The monarch ordered him to be
 
clothed with a robe of honour, presented him with ten horses, ten mules, and ten camels, out of his own stables; to all which favours he added a purse of ten thousand sequins for the expences of his journey, and gave him a letter of recommendation to the governor of Damascus." 
 
 
 
 
 MRS. EGERTON. 
 To shew you, that I entirely approve and admire the sentiments of your father on the duties of Friendship, and the liberal principles by which it is actuated, I will read you the little history of two French peasants. I hope when you have heard it, you will admire and imitate the disinterested, generous Colin, while you avoid and pity the conduct of the simple, misled Jeanot. 
 
 
 
 
 FRIENDSHIP AND FORGIVENESS: Or JEANOT and COLIN. 
 MANY persons worthy of credit have seen Jeanot and Colin at school, at the town of Issoir, in Auvergne, a place celebrated through the whole world for its college and its kettles. Jeanot was the son of a horse-dealer of high renown, and Colin derived his birth from an able husbandman, who cultivated a neighbouring farm, and who, after he had paid the taxes, was not superabundantly rich at the year's end. 
 Jeanot and Colin were comely lads for Auvergnese, and had a great friendship for each other; they had their little schemes and their tte--ttes, upon which they reflected with pleasure, even when in other company. 
 The time of their being at school was nearly expired, when a taylor brought Jeanot a suit of figured velvet, with a letter directed to Monsieur de la Jeanotiere. Colin admired the cloaths without envy, but Jeanot assumed an air of superiority, which grieved him to the heart. From this moment Jeanot threw aside his book, was continually gazing in the looking-glass, and seemed to despise the world. 
 Some time after a valet came post with another letter directed to Monsieur le Marquis de la Janotiere, which contained an order from Monsieur his father for his coming to Paris. Jeanot, as he got into the chaise, took Colin by the hand, and gave him a smile of protection with the air of a great man. Colin, touched with a sense of his own inferiority, melted into tears; and Jeanot drove away in all the glory of his new dignity. 
 Those readers who love to comprehend every thing as they go on, should be informed, that Jeanot, the father, had suddenly acquired an immense fortune. If it should be asked how immense fortunes are acquired, the answer is ready, by being fortunate. Monsieur Jeanot was a likely fellow, and madame was by no means without her charms. It happened that, whilst she was still in her bloom,
 
they were brought to Paris by a law-suit, which totally ruined them; but Fortune, who delights in the capricious abasement and exaltation of mankind, just then threw them in the way of a commissary, who had contracted to furnish the military hospitals during the war. This commissary was a man of talents, and could boast of having killed more soldiers in one year, than gun-powder had killed in ten. The wife of this extraordinary person was smitten with Jeanot, whilst he himself was smitten with Jeanot's wife. Jeanot soon came in for a share of the contract. When once a man gets into the middle of the stream, the tide will carry him along; thus Commissaries and Contractors get immense wealth without trouble. Such was the good fortune of Jeanot the father, who became immediately Monsieur de la Janotiere; and soon after having bought a marquisate, which at once ennobled him and his children, he sent for the marquis his son from school, that he might place him among the beau-monde of Paris. 
 Colin, who remembered his old school-fellow with a tender sensibility, wrote him a few lines of congratulation: the new Marquis sent no answer, and Colin fell sick with grief. 
 In the mean time the father and mother procured a tutor for their son; this tutor was a man of a genteel appearance, but who knew little, and consequently could teach little. The father was desirous the son should learn Latin; the mother opposed
 
it. After much debate, it was agreed that the question should be referred to a certain celebrated author. "Sir," said the master of the house, "as you are a Latin scholar, and a man of the world" "I a Latin scholar!" says the bel esprit, "I don't know a word of the language; and so much the better for me; those people certainly speak their own language best, whose attention is not divided among several. Consider only the ladies, how much more pleasing is their wit than ours! their letters are written with infinitely more elegance; and this superiority is entirely owing to their not having learned Latin." 
 "Very well," says madame, "am I not then in the right? I would have my son a man of wit; I would have him make a figure in the world, and you see plainly that if he learn Latin he will be undone. Are operas and plays, I'd fain know, performed in Latin? Do the lawyers speak Latin at the bar? or do young gentlemen make love in Latin?" 
 Monsieur de la Janotiere being wholly unable to resist this amazing force of argument, immediately passed sentence, and it was concluded that the young Marquis should not lose his time in getting acquainted with Cicero, Horace, and Virgil. 
 But then what shall he learn? for, certainly, he must learn something. May he not be taught a little geography? "Of what service will that be," says the tutor? "When the Marquis shall think
 
proper to visit his estates, do you think the postilions will not know the road? take my word for it, they are in no danger of losing their way. A man of fashion can travel very well without a quadrant, and go with great conveniency from Paris to Auvergne, without knowing what latitude he is in." 
 "You are certainly right," says the father; "but I have heard something of a fine science, which, I think, they call Astronomy." "'Tis pity," says the tutor, "you ever heard of it all; what occasion is there for people in this world to regulate their motions by the stars? Is it fit that a young Marquis should be fatigued to death by the calculation of an eclipse, when he may find the time exactly by consulting an almanack; which will also acquaint him with all the moveable feasts, the age of the moon, and the age of every sovereign prince in Europe." 
 Madame entirely agreed; the Marquis her son was overjoyed, and the father was in suspence. "What then, says he, must my son learn?" "To be amiable," replied the friend they had consulted, "if he knows the art of pleasing, he knows all that is worth knowing; and this art he cannot fail of learning under his mother's eye, though neither she nor you should give yourselves the least trouble about it." 
 Madame was delighted with this compliment, and embraced the dunce who had paid it. "Ah! Sir, said she, it is easy to discover that you are wiser than
 
the world; my son will be wholly indebted to you for his education. But, perhaps, after all, it would not be amiss for him to know a little of History." Alas, madam, replied the oracle, what good can that do him? Certainly, no history is either useful or pleasing but that of the day. All ancient history, as a certain author has justly observed, is nothing more than fable artfully put together; and as for modern history, it is a chaos impossible to be reduced to order. Of what importance is it to your son, that Charlemagne instituted the twelve peers of France? And that his son had an impediment in his speech? And never was observation more just, than that the young mind is too often buried under a load of useless learning, by which its native powers are first restrained, and then destroyed; but of all that is absurd among what are called the sciences, the most absurd is Geometry. The objects of Geometry are surfaces, lines, and points, which have no existence in nature; and a hundred curve lines are fancied Between a circle and a strait line that touches it, though in reality there is not room for a straw. In short, Geometry is no better than a dull joke. 
 Though Monsieur and Madame scarce understood one word of this ingenious argument against Geometry, it made a great impression, and they declared themselves entirely of the tutor's mind. 
 A noble Lord, continued the Tutor, like Monsieur le Marquis, ought not to puzzle his brain with vain speculation. Should he have occasion for the
 
most sublime part of this science, to lay down a plan of his estates, he may have them surveyed for a little money; would he trace his nobility back to the remotest ages, he may, without difficulty, find a Benedictine monk that will do it. The same may be said of all the arts. A young Lord of illustrious birth is neither a painter, a musician, an architect, nor a statuary; but he makes all these arts flourish by his munificence; and it is certainly better to patronize than practise them. It is enough for the Marquis to have taste; it is the duty of artists to exert their skill for his pleasure and advantage; it has been well said that persons of quality, I mean those who are very rich, know all things without learning any; their taste enables them to judge of every thing for which they can pay. 
 You have observed, madam, says he, that the great purpose of life is to please; but will any man pretend that this purpose can be answered by the sciences? Who is there that would think of mentioning Geometry in good company? Would any body ask a gentleman what star rose in a morning with the sun? Certainly not, replied the Marchioness, whose charms had introduced her to the beau monde; and it is by no means fit that my son should cramp his genius by the study of all this trumpery. But what is it that we shall teach him? For certainly, as his father has observed, a young gentleman ought to be qualified to shine upon occasion. I remember to have heard an Abb say, that
 
there was one science extremely agreeable and genteel; I cannot recollect the name of it, but it began with a B. With a B, madam? says the genius, it could not be Botany! No, replied the lady, it was not botany, yet it ended something like that too. O! I know what it was, says he, it was Blasonry; but I assure you it is by no means the mode. At present, the study of heraldry would be infinite, for there is not a barber that has not his coat of arms; and when a thing becomes common, you know people of fashion should always disregard it. Upon the whole, this sagacious and illustrious society having fairly discussed all the sciences, it was determined that Monsieur le Marquis de la Janotiere should learn to dance. 
 Nature, however, which indeed does every thing, had given this flower of nobility a talent which very soon displayed itself with astonishing success. This happy talent was that of singing a good song, the graces of youth, joined to so superior an endowment, drew attention, and he was a favourite among the ladies. Having his head full of songs, he formed new ones out of old, and was continually repeating them; but as his verses had commonly a foot too little, or too much, he was at the expence of having them corrected; and he at last got into the literary annals of the time. 
 The Marchioness considering herself as the patroness of wit, gave suppers to the wits of the town; the young man's head was turned; he acquired the
 
art of speaking without knowing what he would say, and by habit became perfect in being fit for nothing. 
 When his father found him thus amazingly eloquent, he very much regretted that he had not taught him Latin, as he then might have purchased for him a considerable department in the law. His mother, who looked still higher, undertook to get him a regiment, and in the mean time the young gentleman himself thought fit to make love. 
 Love sometimes costs more than a regiment; his expences were very great; and his parents run out their fortune by living like people of the first quality. 
 But as the state of their finances was known only to themselves, a young widow of great rank, but small fortune, supposing them to be very opulent, resolved to secure their riches, by making the young Marquis her husband. 
 She accordingly threw out a lure, and brought him to her house; she convinced him that he was by no means indifferent to her; led him on by degrees; and at length so fascinated him by her wiles and her charms, that the conquest was compleat. At the same time she gave him so many commendations, and so much good advice, that the father and mother considered her as the best friend they had in the world. 
 An old lady in the neighbourhood proposed the marriage on the part of the widow and the father
 
and mother, dazzled with the splendor of such an alliance, accepted the proposition with joy. 
 He was kneeling one morning at the feet of the dear angel, when a servant of the Marchioness his mother arrived in great haste, and with looks as wild as if he had seen an apparition: I am come, says he, with news very different from what you think of; the Sheriff's officers are in possession of my Lord's house, they have seized his goods, talk of securing his person, and, as I have not a moment to lose, I am going to secure my wages. 
 Don't be in such a hurry, says the Marquis, let us see a little into this affair. Do, says the widow, run this instant, and punish the wretches for their insolence. 
 He hasted, and found that his father was already carried to prison, and the servants were gone off, each having carried away what he could lay his hands upon. He saw his mother totally deserted, without succour and without comfort, drowned in tears, with nothing left but the remembrance of her fortune, her beauty, her follies, and her faults. 
 After her son had wept with her till the tumult of his mind a little subsided, and he was able to speak, he endeavoured to alleviate her distress by a reflection that had soothed his own. Do not let us despair, says he, the widow whom I was about to marry, is yet more generous than rich; I will answer for all that is in her power; I'll fly to her this moment, and bring her hither. 
 He flew to his mistress, and sound her tete-a-tete with a handsome young officer. What is it you, Monsieur de la Janotiere? says she what in the name of wonder have you to do here? How could you think of leaving your poor mother? Go back to her, for heaven's sake, and tell her how sorry I am for her misfortune. I always wished her well; and as my woman is going away, I shall not think of another till I have given her the refusal or the place. My good lad, said the officer, you seem to be well made; if you will enter Into my corps, I will enlist you upon good terms. 
 The Marquis, struck speechless with rage and indignation, burst away without reply, to his old tutor, to pour his sorrows into his bosom, and derive comfort from his advice. The tutor proposed that he should undertake the education of children. Alas, says the Marquis, I know nothing  you have taught me nothing and that has been the source of all my misfortunes. Write novels, says another; it is an excellent expedient to get money. 
 Sunk deeper in despair than ever, his last resource was to a monk who had been his mother's confessor. The Monk ran to him in a rapture of surprize and joy; Monsieur le Marquis! what do you do here on foot? where is your coach? The unhappy youth replied by giving him an account of the ruin of his family. The Monk became grave, indifferent, and important: my son, said he, we may now see plainly what heaven intended for you; riches serve only to
 
corrupt the heart: heaven has therefore reduced you to beggary; my son, adieu! a lady of fashion is now waiting for me at court. 
 The poor Marquis, as he stood ruminating in the street, stupified with misfortune, saw a kind of covered carriage coming rumbling along, followed by waggons heavily laden. In this vehicle sat a young man, coarsely clad, with a fresh coloured girl by his side. Bless my soul, says he, surely this is Jeanot! The Marquis started, looked up, and the driver instantly stopped. Yes, by my faith, said he, it is even Jeanot himself; and instantly caught him in his arms. Jeanot was covered with confusion and tears. You have forsaken me, says Colin, but I am determined to love you for all that. Jeanot told him a part of his history. Come home with me, said Colin, you shall tell the rest at your leisure; salute my little wife; this is she; let us make haste to dinner. 
 Pray, says Jeanot, what is all this baggage; does it belong to you? Yes, says Colin, to me and my wife, we are just come out of the country; I am at the head of a great manufactory; I married the daughter of a man who had acquired very considerable substance; we work hard, providence has blessed our endeavours, we continue to get forward in the world, are happy in ourselves, and have it in our power to assist our friend Jeanot. Be a Marquis no longer; all the great folks in the world are not worth one true friend: you shall live with me in the country, you shall learn my trade, and be my partner,
 
and we will live chearfully in the obscure but happy retreat where we were born. 
 Jeanot heard this proposal with sensations not to be described; his heart was divided between grief and joy, tenderness and shame; and, turning to Colin, he said, in a low voice, "when all my gay friends have deserted me, Colin, whom I injuriously neglected, has afforded me that comfort which I did not deserve." 
 What a lecture is this for those who are entering into life? The virtue of Colin, called out that virtue which lay hidden in the breast of Jeanot, and which all his habits of folly and dissipation had not destroyed. He felt a secret repugnance to desert his father and mother. We will take care of them, says Colin. Jeanot at length married Colin's sister, who made him happy; and Jeanot the father, and Jeanot the mother, and Jeanot the son, were made sensible that happiness is not to be found in vanity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 DIALOGUE XVII. 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 A CERTAIN honest peasant was possessed of a fine watchful house-dog; a friend to his servants, no enemy to his guests, and the terror of thieves. His fidelity was so well known in the neighbourhood,
 
that, after a few successless attempts, not a single rogue had, for many years, dared to come within the sphere of this excellent centinel. 
 One evening, as the good man and his wife sat round the fire, talking of their oeconomy, "I have been thinking, wife, says the farmer, that this great dog of our's is an useless expence to us: he takes a deal of keeping, his collars and chains cost money, we shall soon be obliged to build him a new kennel, our brooms are worn out in keeping him clean, beside many a truss of straw that serves for his bed; and all this in a place where, for many years past, we have neither heard of murder nor theft." "I have long thought of the same thing, replied the wife; our girls have other business than to wait on an idle creature; besides, here is my little favourite can bark as loud as the largest mastiff." 
 Sentence was quickly passed, and the faithful centinel was put to death; but he was scarce covered with earth, before a band of thieves were gathered to consult on the best means to execute their design. Night came on; they broke into the house, and while the pampered favourite slept upon his cushion, robbed the farmer of all his money and furniture. 
 I have no doubt, my children, you all understand the moral of this fable, and that you think the peasant and his wife deserved their punishment. Ingratitude is a vice which, like lying, every body is ashamed of, and yet almost every body practises. The fact is, people deceive themselves in summing up the
 
account of reciprocal obligation; they omit so many particulars which they ought punctually to remember, and insert so many which it becomes them to forget, that the ballance is but too generally erroneous. It is our duty to be equally exact in debts of gratitude as in those of trade; nay more so, for an omission of pecuniary commerce may sometimes be honourably accommodated, but the sin of ingratitude can never be expiated. 
 Philip of Macedon sent one of his courtiers on a voyage to transact an affair of some consequence, but a storm coming on, the courtier was shipwrecked, and must indubitably have perished, had it not been for the hospitality of a peasant who lived on the sea-shore, and who ventured his own life in a small boat, to preserve that of a distressed stranger. By this peasant the courtier was taken up, brought to his own house, recovered, and treated with the utmost humanity; and after staying with him a month, kindly dismissed and furnished with money to bear his expences. At his return, the King was made acquainted with the peril he had been in, and the distress he had undergone, but not with the benefits he had received. Philip, moved with the story, told him he would remember his fidelity, and the dangers he had suffered for his sake. The courtier taking advantage of the King's promise, told him he had observed a beautiful little farm on the sea-coast, that exactly suited his taste, on the very spot where he had been wrecked, and besought him to bestow it on him
 
as a monument of his escape, and his Majesty's bounty. Accordingly Philip wrote to Pausanias, the governor of the province, to put him in possession of the desired farm. The poor peasant, who had so generously saved the life of this wretch, being robbed of his right, and stung with the ingratitude of of the act, immediately made a journey to the court of Philip, applied himself to the King, and related his story. Philip amazed and enraged at the ingratitude of his villainous courtier, had him seized instantly, and marked him in the forehead with these words, The UNGRATEFUL GUEST, and restored the farm to its proper owner. 
 
 
 MISS FORRESTER. 
 This courtier was a very wicked man, Sir. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Very true, my dear Miss Forrester, but ingratitude is always wickedness. 
 
 
 MR. FORRESTER. 
 If I had been King Philip, I would have taken off his head, he should never have been ship-wrecked again. 
 
 
 MRS. EGERTON. 
 In my opinion, Sir, his punishment was far more severe as it was. But come, let us listen to the story of the Dervise and Abdallah. 
 
 
 
 
 
 INGRATITUDE, Or the CANDLESTICK. 
 A Dervise, venerable by his age, fell ill in the house of a woman who had been long a widow, and lived in extreme poverty in the suburbs of Balsora. He was so touched with the assiduity and zeal with which she had assisted him, that at his departure he said, "I have remarked that you have wherewith to subsist alone, but that you have not sufficient to share with your only son, the young Abdallah. If you will trust him to me, I will endeavour to acknowledge, in his person, the obligations I am under for your great care of me." The widow received his proposal with joy; and the Dervise departed with the young man, informing her, that they should perform a journey which would last near two years. They travelled; the Dervise kept him in affluence, gave him excellent instructions, cured him of a dangerous disease with which he had been attacked; in fine, he took the same care of him, as if he had been his own son. Abdallah, a hundred times testified his gratitude for all his bounties; but the old man always answered, "my son, it is by actions that gratitude is proved; we shall see in proper time and place, whether you are as grateful as you profess to be." 
 One day, in a solitary place, the Dervise said to Abdallah, "My son, we are now at the end of our
 
journey; I shall employ my prayers to obtain from heaven, that the earth may open and make an entrance wide enough to permit thee to descend into a place, where thou wilt find one of the greatest treasures that the earth incloses in her bowels. Hast thou courage to descend into this subterraneous cave?" Abdallah declared he might depend upon his obedience and zeal. The Dervise then lighted a small fire, into which he cast a persume; then read and prayed for some moments, when the earth opened: "Thou mayest now enter, my dear Abdallah. Remember, said the Dervise, that it is in thy power to do me a great service, and that this is, perhaps, the only opportunity thou canst ever have of testifying thy gratitude. Be not dazzled by the riches thou wilt find there; but think only of seizing upon an iron candlestick with twelve branches, which thou wilt find close to a door, and which is absolutely necessary to me; bring it up to me immediately." Abdallah promised, and descended boldly into the cave. But forgetting what had been expressly recommended to him, whilst he was filling his vest and his bosom with gold and jewels, the opening by which he entered, closed. He had, however, presence of mind enough to seize upon the iron candlestick, and though his situation was very terrible, he did not abandon himself to despair, but reflected in what manner he should get out of a place which might become his grave. Apprehending that the cave had closed because he had not followed the
 
order of the Dervise, he recalled to memory the care and goodness he had been loaded with, reproached himself with his ingratitude, and finished his meditation by humbling himself in prayer. At length, after much inquietude and pain, he was fortunate enough to find a narrow passage which directed him out; though it was not till he had persevered for a considerable way, that he perceived a small opening covered with briars and thorns, through which he returned to the light of the sun. He looked on all sides to discover the Dervise, but in vain. He wished to deliver him the iron candlestick, and formed a design of quitting him, being rich enough with what he had taken out of the cavern, to live in affluence without his assistance. 
 Not perceiving the Dervise, nor remembering any of the places through which he had passed, he went on as fortune seemed to direct, and was soon extremely astonished to find himself opposite to his mother's house, from which he imagined he was at a great distance. She immediately enquired after the holy Dervise. Abdallah told her frankly what had happened to him, and the danger he had ran to satisfy his ambitious desires, He afterwards produced to her the riches with which he was loaded. His mother concluded, upon the sight of them, that the Dervise designed only to make trial of his courage and obedience; and that they had a right to the happiness which fortune had poured upon them. Doubtless, added she, such was the intention of the
 
holy Dervise. Whilst, with avidity, they contemplated upon these treasures, whilst dazzled with their lustre, and forming a thousand projects, they vanished from before their eyes. Then it was that Abdallah most sincerely reproached himself with ingratitude and disobedience; and, observing that the iron candlestick had resisted the enchantment, or rather that the punishment is just which those deserve who do not execute what they promise, he said, prostrating himself, "What I deserve has happened to me; I have lost what I had designed to keep, and the candlestick which I intended to deliver up, remains with me: it is a proof, that this rightly belongs to him, and that the rest was unjustly acquired." He finished with these words, and placed the candlestick in the midst of their little house. 
 When night came on, without reflecting upon it, he placed a light in this candlestick. Immediately they saw a Dervise, who turned round for an hour, and disappeared, after having thrown them an asper A small silver coin. . This candlestick had twelve branches: Abdallah, who had been now meditating all day upon what he had seen in the night, was willing to know what would happen the next night, if he should put a light into each branch; he did so, and twelve dervises appeared at the instant. These turned round also for an hour, and each of them threw an asper, as they disappeared. He repeated every night the same ceremony; which had always
 
the same success; but he never could make it succeed more than once in twenty-four hours. So trifling a sum was enough for subsistence: there was a time when they would not have desired more to be made happy; but it was not considerable enough to change their fortune. It is dangerous for the imagination to be fixed upon the idea of riches. The sight of what he flattered himself he should possess, and the projects he had formed, had left such profound traces in his mind, as nothing could efface. Reflecting on the small advantage he drew from the candlestick, he resolved to carry it back to the Dervise, in hopes that he might obtain of him the treasure he had seen, or at least recover the riches which had vanished, by restoring to him what he had testified so earnest a desire for. Remembering his name, and that of the city where he inhabited, he departed immediately for Magrebi, carrying with him the candlestick; taking care to light it every night, as by that means he was furnished with necessaries on the road, without being obliged to implore the compassion of the faithful. When he arrived at Magrebi, his first care was to enquire at what house, or in what convent Abounadar lodged. Every body was able to tell him his habitation. He repaired thither directly, and found fifty porters at his gate, each with a golden-headed staff in his hands. The court of his palace was filled with domestics and slaves; in fine, no residence of a Prince could expose to view greater magnificence. Abdallah, struck with
 
astonishment and admiration, feared to proceed. Certainly, thought he, I either explained myself wrong, or those to whom I addressed myself designed to make a jest of me, because I am a stranger. This the habitation of a Dervise! It is that of a King! In this embarrassment a person approached him, and said, Abdallah, thou art welcome; my master, Abounadar, has long expected thee. He was then conducted to a magnificent pavilion, where the Dervise was seated. Abdallah, struck with the splendor which he beheld on all sides, would have prostrated himself at his feet, but Abounadar prevented him; and, when he would have made a merit of restoring the candlestick, "Thou art ungrateful, said he; dost thou imagine that I am to be imposed on? I am not ignorant of thy thoughts. Hadst thou known the value of this candlestick, never wouldst thou have brought it to me! I shall make thee sensible of its true use." Immediately he placed a light in each of its branches; and when the twelve dervises had turned round for some time, gave each of them a touch with a cane, and in a moment they were converted into twelve heaps of sequins A Turkish gold coin. , diamonds, and other precious stones. "This, said he, is the proper use to be made of this marvellous candlestick. As to me, I never desired it, but as a curiosity in my cabinet; as a talisman composed by a Sage whom I revere; and I am pleased to expose it sometimes to those who come to visit me. To prove
 
to thee that curiosity was the motive of my search for it, here are the keys of my magazines, open them, and judge of my treasures; tell me if the most insatiable miser would not be satisfied with them." Abdallah obeyed him; he examined twelve magazines of great extent, and they produced new desires. The regret of having restored the candlestick, without finding out the use of it, pierced the heart of Abdallah. Abounadar seemed not to perceive it; loaded him with caresses, kept him some days in his house, and commanded that he should be treated as himself. At the eve of the day which he had fixed for his departure, he said to him, "Abdallah, my son, I believe, by what has happened to thee, thou art cured of the frightful vice of ingratitude; however, I owe thee a mark of my affection, for having undertaken so long a journey, with a view of bringing me what I desired; thou mayest depart, I shall detain thee no longer. Tomorrow, at the gate of my palace, thou shalt find one of my horses to carry thee; I make thee a present of it, as well as of a slave who shall conduct thee home; and two camels loaded with such gold and jewels, as thou shalt chuse for thyself out of my treasures." Abdallah answered with all that an avaritious heart could express, when its passion was satisfied; and retired to rest till the morning arrived, which was fixed for his departure. 
 During the night he was still agitated, without being able to think of any thing but the candlestick,
 
and what it had produced. "I had it, said he, long in my power; Abounadar, without me, had never been the possessor of it. What risks did I not run in the subterraneous vault? Why does he now possess this treasure of treasures? Because I had the probity, or rather the folly, to bring it back to him. He profits by my labours, and the danger I have incurred in so long a journey. And what does he give me in return? Two camels loaded with gold and jewels; in one moment the candlestick will furnish him with ten times as much. It is Abounadar who is ungrateful: What injury shall I do him in taking away this candlestick? None certainly; he is rich: and what are my possessions?" Such ideas determined him, at length, to make every possible attempt to seize upon the candlestick. It was not difficult, for Abounadar had trusted him with the keys of his magazines. He knew where the candlestick was placed. He seized upon it, hid it in the bottom of one of the sacks, which he filled with the gold and other treasure he was allowed to take, and secured that, as well as the rest, upon one of his camels. He had no other anxiety now than for his departure; and after having hastily bid adieu to the generous Abounadar, delivered him his keys, and departed with the horse, the slave, and the two camels. 
 When he was at some distance from Balsora, he sold his slave, resolving not to retain the witness of his former poverty, nor of the source of his present
 
riches. He bought another, and arrived without obstacle at his mother's. His first care was to place the lading of his camels and the candlestick in the most private room of the house; and, in the impatience to feed his eyes with such opulence, he placed lights immediately in the candlestick: the twelve dervises appearing, he struck each of them with a cane with all his strength, lest he should be failing in the laws of the talisman: but he had not remarked, that Abounadar, when he struck them, had the cane in his left-hand. Abdallah, by a natural motion, made use of his right hand; and the dervises, instead of becoming heaps of riches, immediately drew each from beneath his robes a formidable club, with which they struck him repeatedly, and leaving him half dead, disappeared with all his treasure, camels, horse, slave, and the candlestick. 
 Thus was Abdallah punished for unreasonable ambition, which perhaps might have been pardonable, if it had not been accompanied by an ingratitude as wicked as it was audacious. 
 
 
 
 
 FANNY. 
 Lord, Mamma, what a foolish man that Abdallah was! but it is a very pretty story though. 
 
 
 MRS. EGERTON. 
 Yes, my dear, and I have another very pretty story for you, as you shall hear. It is of a Turk, who was as remarkable for his generous gratitude,
 
as the persons whose history you have heard were for the contrary. 
 
 
 
 
 GRATITUDE: Or the Story of PIETRO CORNARO, and the grateful TURK. 
 SIGNIOR Pietro Cornaro, an accomplished young gentleman of an ancient family, and of considerable fortune in the city of Ferrara in Italy, was induced to travel through the provinces of his celebrated country, that he might satisfy curiosity, and enrich his mind with such acquirements, as would distinguish him, and his acquisitions, from persons less qualified and less ambitious of true renown. He arrived at Leghorn, and took up lodgings at an inn. Happening to be placed in an apartment that opened to the public street, he would often walk about his room, and by looking frequently upon the street, divert himself agreeably with curious observations on whatever passed before him. It is a custom of this town to give leave to the Turks, who serve them as slaves, to ply as porters, or betake themselves to any other drudgery, obliging them to pay their masters a certain proportion of what they earn, and permitting them to keep the overplus for their own necessities. Directly opposite to Cornaro's chamber was a bench, on which he often observed a Turkish slave, thoughtful and dejected, leaning pensively his head upon his hand, and dropping now and
 
then a silent tear, which he endeavoured secretly to wipe away with his knot of ropes, the wretched badge of his unfortunate employment. The frequent repetition of this mournful practice struck the compassionate Italian; who, earnestly desirous to become acquainted with the reason of his sorrow, sent at last a messenger to bring him to his apartment; and proceeded to demand the manner of his being taken, and how long he had continued in a state of slavery. With wringing hands and elevated eyes, which seemed to blame his stars for his unpitied misery, the disconsolate Mahometan began his tale; and watered his complaints with showers of tears. "I am, says he, an honest Mussulman, neither the friend of war or rapine, but become a prey to both. In an unlucky visit made to see an aged father, then in health and peace at Cyprus, now perhaps laid cold and breathless, was I taken by the Christians, made a slave, and reduced to what you now behold." 
 These sad complaints were followed by a sincere and full account of every accident which had concurred to reduce him to this slavery. He informed his kind enquirer, that he had sorrowfully spent four tedious years in that condition, and had left three wives, two sons, now men, and nine small children, to deplore his loss; who were wholly destitute of the means whereby to know his present condition. The pitying breast of Signior Pietro, framed for tender and compassionate emotions, melted generously with sympathetic distress, to find the wretched and forlorn
 
situation of this complaining Mussulman; and after asking his name, and other questions, gave him money, and dismissed him, bidding him hope for succour. 
 The disconsolate Turk returned to the unwelcome practice of his daily labours. The benevolent Pietro seriously reflecting on this unfortunate man's sorrow, and considering that the will of Providence, or some unsuspected turn of fortune, might one day make the case his own, might teach him, by the bitter proof of sad experience, how to pity others' miseries, resolved to do a noble act of Christian charity; and making interest with the governor, found means to get the Turk released, for the ransom of about one hundred and forty-five ducats. Never could more welcome and surprising news rejoice the gladdened heart of a human sufferer, than that which brought the happy Turk the news of his delivery. With rapid transports of ungoverned joy, he fell upon his knees, embraced the feet of his adored redeemer, and with numerous vows of heart-felt gratitude, entreated Signior Pietro to inform him how he might return, twofold, that friendly sum, which had so effectually purchased his liberty. The generous Italian told him he expected no return; yet if his soul was noble, and would urge him to be grateful, he asked only the solemn promise, that he would, when arrived in Turkey, redeem from slavery some Christian, whom he might think deserving of it, and send him back, to visit once again his native country. The redeemed Turk, supplied with cloaths
 
and all things necessary, embarked on board an English vessel bound for Asia, and returned to his habitation. About three months after the Mahometan's departure from Leghorn, Signior Pietro, having been the greatest part of that time at Venice, became enamoured of a beautiful young lady, called Maria Margarita Delfino, who had for several years resided in that town, under the care of a substantial merchant, youngest brother to her father, who with her sisters, and the major part of her relations, lived at Malta. Nothing could persuade the amorous Italian from a violent expression of his growing passion; he solicited her uncle with incessant importunities, and at last engaged him to permit him to address her upon this condition, that he should accompany his niece and him to Malta, there to obtain her father's approbation of his person and condition. This was promised, and he continued four months, daily visiting the object of his affection, till he gained entirely her consent to marry him, when she should be authorised by her father's orders. They embarked on board a vessel bound for Malta, and belonging to that island, which they were almost arrived in sight of, when a Turkish galley met them, made undistinguished prize of all her cargo, and consigning Signior Pietro, with his mistress and her uncle to slavery, landed them at Smyrna, together with the valuable prize in which they were taken. I forgot to mention, that the three companions in this miserable state had changed
 
their cloaths for coarse and rougher habits, when they saw the danger they were falling into; that, being so disguised, they might expect a ransom at a smaller charge, than otherwise would serve; so that being taken with the common people, they were like them, in chains, conducted to the public market, where slaves are bought and sold as sheep or oxen. Signior Pietro and the young lady's uncle were tied together, and placed, with many more, to wait the purchase of the highest bidder. Opposite to them the poor unhappy lady stood, half dead with fear and anguish, with a numerous crowd of Christian women, young and old, expecting every moment to be bought, and torn away from any hopes of ever seeing her lover and relations. At last a young and graceful Turk came up to the disconsolate Maria, and bargaining immediately with the proper officer, paid the money; then throwing over her a veil he had brought on purpose, took her from the rest, and carried her away with an uncommon satisfaction. Many a complaining look did the despairing lady give her friends, who answered her with all the mournful marks of silent lamentation, and were now (especially the lover) so confounded with their misery, that they stood like statues, looking stedfastly on the ground, taking little notice of the many purchasers, who walked about from place to place to view the persons of the wretched captives. 
 While they stood thus fixed in contemplation on the transitory blessings of this mortal life, there came a Turk from stall to stall, enquiring earnestly of every officer what quality and country their slaves were of; and examining particularly the slaves themselves, he at last came to Signior Pietro, who hanging down his head, the Turk stooped forward to look upon his face; a courtesy not often practised by those barbarous people, who, when a slave refuses to hold up his face, will generally take them roughly by the chin, as when a jockey looks into a horse's mouth. The Turk no sooner saw the face, but starting back in great surprise, he raised his arms and eyes towards heaven, and transported at the strange discovery, cried out aloud, "I thank thee, holy prophet, thou hast guided well my lucky footsteps." The grieved Italian looking up at this surprising exclamation, saw before his eyes the very man whom, in Leghorn, he had so kindly freed from slavery. No pen can describe the raptures he conceived at this happy meeting; swift embraces followed their surprise, and when the wonder of the Turk gave him leave to speak again, he thus addressed himself to Signior Pietro: "I promised thee, said he, thou best of Christians, that I would certainly redeem from servitude such slave as I should judge should more than any else deserve that blessing; and now, thanks to Mahomet! in thee have I discovered him." Instantly he ordered the officer who guarded him to send some
 
person for his ransom, and to conduct him directly to his own house. The overjoyed Italian heard with pleasure the return of his gratitude; but told him, "If he would be doubly kind, he might redeem his friend who suffered with him, and they would find some speedy means to reimburse his charges." The proposition was embraced as soon as offered, and a person being sent to take the money, received immediately the ransom he demanded, and returning to market, left the gentlemen to the care of their redeemer. The Turk's two sons, when told of the accident by which their father met the man to whom he owed his liberty, expressed sincere and grateful joy, and bid them welcome with inexpressible civility. After having heard the manner of their being taken, and their sorrowful complaint for the loss of an unhappy virgin, whom they so ardently loved, the eldest of the two sons cried out with earnestness, "Now, by the religion of our holy prophet, and his people, my father's house contains this very virgin!" He proceeded to inform them, that he had bought that morning a young Christian slave, to wait upon his mother and his father's other wives; that she had given the same account as they had done of the particulars of her captivity; that she was then above, among the women, and he would, for satisfaction, fetch her down that very moment. It is easy to imagine the disorder of their bosoms, possessed alternately by hope and fear, till doubt gave way to certainty, and
 
they beheld the person they had so lately lost, conducted to their arms by him to whom the laws of Turkey gave her as a lawful purchase. 
 They staid a week with their landlord, who would not rest till he had ransomed two men servants, and a maid who waited on the lady: these, together with as many of the goods and cloaths as he could purchase from the Turk who took them, he bestowed again on their lawful owners, gave them a considerable sum of money, and contrived to get them a passage on board a vessel of Mars iller, then bound to Malta. Signior Pietro, the young lady, and her uncle, frequently endeavoured to oblige this honest Turk to take their bills, or find some other method to secure his money, but he persisted in a positive refusal of all their proffers, telling Signior Pietro the debt was paid before it was contracted; and would often lay his hand devoutly on his bosom, and with a zealous sigh repeat this proverb, "The God of Heaven has given us plenty, that we may give Him what need requires." When they arrived at Malta, Signior Pietro soon obtained the consent of the young lady's father, and their nuptials were quickly after celebrated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DIALOGUE XVIII. 
 
 MRS. EGERTON. 
 YOU remember, my dear Fanny, that you and your sister had a little argument this morning, at breakfast, concerning what children are happiest and best, those who are indulged in every thing they desire, or those who are kept in awe, and obliged to obey. Your sister, who is older, and consequently has more knowledge than you, told you, that it would, perhaps, be better for a child to suffer under a tyrannical parent, than be permitted to proceed in irregularities and pettish humours, which children, if they were not taught otherwise, would all do. Now, you shall hear the history of Charlotte and Maria Woodland. 
 
 
 
 
 INDULGENCE: Or the TWO SISTERS. 
 IT is a remark made by almost every one, that it is the unhappiness of human nature never to be satisfied. Philosophers say this propensity is the spring of action, therefore necessary. They add, likewise, that there is not that disproportion in the happiness of rich and poor, wise and foolish, &c. &c. as is generally imagined: nay, many have been
 
bold enough to assert, that content is more frequently found with poverty and folly, than with their opposites. It is not our purpose to enquire, by a dry investigation of the subject, into the truth or falsehood of these opinions, but to leave the reader to make what applications he pleases from the following tale; wherein, if we are not mistaken, he will perceive the bad effects of false education built upon false hopes, and the necessity of enuring the youthful mind, even from the cradle, to crosses. Would not any man laugh to see a petit maitre attempting to carry the side of an ox, like a porter? How then can we expect a weak enervated mind to support those worst of loads, poverty and contempt? 
 Mr. and Mrs. Woodland, the parents of our heroines, were once servants in the same family, which being a nobleman's, where they continually beheld the utmost luxury, and what is called politeness and good breeding, they soon acquired a sufficient degree of contempt for their origin, and their former acquaintance. Having saved some money, they married, quitted their service, and betook themselves to business. Here Mrs. Woodland, who, of the two, had the most violent ideas of gentility, insisted upon going into a genteel business, where they might have customers that understood good manners, and would pay a proper respect to people that knew how to bemean themselves; for, said she, I can never condescend to stand behind a counter
 
curtseying and serving out farthing candles and halfpenny-worths of tobacco to every dirty wretch that comes in. Accordingly they opened a lace-shop, which being well situated, answered their expectations to the utmost. 
 Charlotte Woodland was their first child, and the only one they had in eight years after their marriage. Every expence was run into for the dress and education of this girl. She was pretty, and her parents thought her a cherub. She had a ready tongue, and they were continually repeating her smart sayings and witty answers. She learnt an oath from her father, and vulgarity from her mother, before she was three years old; and her exploits were told and retold to every one that visited her mamma. 
 As they were mutually resolved that their daughter should not labour under that want of polite education, which they had frequent occasion to lament in themselves, they sent her at six years old to a boarding-school, where she pickt up French phrases without knowing any thing of the language, and run over the keys of a harpsichord without time, tune, or sentiment. She, however, could draw patterns for her aprons and ruffles, acquired every new stitch with alacrity, and danced with more ease than the generality of her school-fellows; she was vain as well as handsome, and therefore bent all her thoughts upon the means of decorating her person. 
 Her parents, for the first eight or ten years of her life, had very great success in trade; enough, had they been prudent, to have made what is usually called a pretty fortune. It was a pity that they had conceived so violent a contempt for every thing that was low and vulgar. Mrs. Woodland could not exist without subscribing to the Opera, Pantheon, &c. &c. because every body did so. She hated horrid English cottons, and filthy Spital-field tabbies: India chintz and French lustrings were so elegant! She was ready to faint at the idea of Buckinghamshire lace; crown quadrille gave her the vapours; and being black-balled at the Coterie, threw her into hysterics for six weeks. 
 Mr. Woodland, though at first very attentive to business, soon fell into the mode of keeping his horse and his mistress, and in time became acquainted with the box and dice. 
 Laboured descriptions are disgusting; the reader's imagination will easily suggest to him the effects of this mutually foolish conduct. Mr. Woodland, in the thirteenth year after he began business, became a bankrupt. Every one was amazed: the reputation of the shop, and the appearance he had so long supported, had deceived the world. 
 Happy for their second daughter, was this affliction. Affected manners, the epithets of adulation, and the proud airs of imagined consequence, had not yet vitiated the tender mind of Maria; who obtained an advantage in the death of her mother.
 
Parents with bad habits and ill regulated passions, are a misfortune rather than a blessing to those who, by observing, learn to imitate them. Maria was peculiarly fortunate. A widow lady with a small income, and without children or relations, whom chance had made acquainted with the family, observed the natural sweetness of Maria's temper, and the acuteness of her understanding, and took a fancy to her. This lady was the reverse of Mrs. Woodland; elegance and affability had banished pride and affectation. She had studied in the schools of adversity, and had learnt the heavenly lessons of humility and humanity. Reader if ever thou shouldst have children, God send them such an instructor. 
 Be not anxious to hear trifling incidents. Behold Maria in the nineteenth year of her age, with manners that might charm wisdom herself, beauty sufficient to astonish a Reynolds, and married to a husband such as thou wouldst wish, hadst thou an angel for thy child. Surely when a pair like this are companions, the road of matrimony is paved with pleasures. If thy wishes outrun thy wants, if thy temper is pettish, and thy heart proud, if thou halt not the art of making thyself beloved, think of Clermont and Maria with a sigh, and endeavour to reform. 
 Different was the destiny of the unfortunate Charlotte. Used to the flattery of inferiors, the sword of neglect wounded sorely the pride of fallen superiority.
 
Her father, unable to place her to advantage in the world, or maintain her in the school, took her home. He now soon discovered the bad effects of the present false mode of education. Hardly able to provide the most scanty pittance, his daughter became a burthen instead of an assistant. Ill qualified for domestic duties, the uncleanliness of the temple proclaimed the indolence of the priestess. Oh ye foolish parents, why will you take so much pains to teach your children such affected antics! Why will you encourage them to curl the nose at the sight of an unwashed saucepan, or to shiver at the touch of cold water! Must the happiness of life be sacrificed to the whiteness of the hand? or why should the making a pie banish them from the society of the rational? Make them glass cages at once, and say to unpolished industry, "Behold what thou shouldst be!" 
 But how should the scholars be wise or virtuous, when the teachers, generally speaking, are foolish and vicious? 
 Charlotte was unhappy at the change of her situation, and enjoyed only those moments when she had leisure to hang some of that finery upon her, which former opulence had provided. Girls are in this age more frequently undone by false pride, than easy belief, and are in greater danger from the supercilious airs of a mother, than the protestations of a lover. Vanity is almost universally the predominant passion of youth. This was the rock on which Charlotte
 
struck; nor need we be surprised, when we consider the tempest which former flattery and present indigence had raised to overset so weak a vessel. 
 Among the acquaintance of her father's fortunate days, was Mr. Benfield, a man of property, and married. His principles varied with his passions, which reigned too absolutely; for though he made frequent professions of, and had great inclinations to virtue, yet were they the masters of his reason, whenever they had a share in the conflict. He had been several times with Mr. Woodland, to visit his daughter while at the boarding-school, and thought her very handsome; nay, had often told her so, and was therefore one of her greatest favourites. When misfortune had overwhelmed her father, the idea of obtaining her for a mistress being not entirely improbable, laid fast hold upon his imagination. His daily visits were construed by the father into acts of the sincerest friendship. He assisted Woodland with his purse, and that corroborated the testimony. His toying with Charlotte was thought to be the effect of former freedoms while she was a child, and considered rather as a condescension than a design. In short, he was continually spoken of by the father, as the only virtuous man he had ever known, and and who alone knew how to distinguish merit in distress. 
 Men, even of moderate abilities, whose minds are intent upon the accomplishment of so favourable a project, can find plausible arguments to deceive and
 
mislead girls; who have had less trifling educations than was the lot of Charlotte. Benfield would often seat her upon his lap, kiss her hand in rapture, sometimes snatch one from her lips, tell her of her beauty, call her divine, then with a sigh say how happy he should have been, had heaven blest him with such a wife. Liberties which at first are alarming to virtue, by repetition become familiar, and the lover who first touches the mole upon his mistress's neck, and afterwards begs permission to kiss it, might not be long, perhaps, before he would take the same freedom with the one upon her knee. 
 When the passions are warm, the mind is weak. Arguments, which to an unbiassed spectator immediately discover their own futility, appear with all the force of truth, when they endeavour to prove what we most earnestly wish could be proved. Charlotte listened with avidity, while Benfield talked to her of a state of nature, and of the inefficacy of marriage to bind affections, as well as the unreasonableness of it in constraining those to cohabit, who were always unhappy in each other's company. She began to think that a noble maxim, which says, "they only are truly married, who love each other, and live together without being obliged to do so." She paid particular attention to Benfield, when he told her it was far better for her to live without the ceremony of marriage, with one who passionately loved her, and would maintain her, not only above want, but in affluence, than to be tied to another
 
who might not have sense to discover her merit, riches to keep her from indigence, not love sufficient to use her with humanity. 
 The rude man is by no means so dangerous to virtue as the plausible. Benfield prevailed, and Charlotte was seduced. He stole her from her father, placed her in lodgings, and treated her at first with all the enthusiasm of love. She, unhappy girl, unacquainted with the caprice and mutability of passion, imagined that the little endearments were never to abate. She felt not her own growing indifference, but was quick at the discovery of her lover's. Neglect produces bickerings; disgust hatred; separation ensues. 
 Keeper succeeded keeper, till vice became familiar. But why should I torture the reader with relations which make the imagination gloomy? Can the depraved life of a miserable prostitute afford satisfaction either to the hearer or the relater? Such did the poor unfortunate Charlotte sink into. Who that has the feelings of a man can stray through the streets of this city, and see such numberless young creatures, whose beautiful features are deformed by the practice of sin and the want of shame, and not feel the blood cold at his heart. Who then that is worthy to be called a man, would endeavour to encrease the number of these, who, of all the miserable, are the most miserable! 
 Gentle reader, let me have power over thy imagination for a moment! Trace with me the unhappy
 
Charlotte through those sinks of sin, the bagnio and the brothel: cloathed by an infamous unfeeling wretch, who receives the hire of her prostitution: abandoned when corroding disease hath stolen the sleekness of her skin, and the marrow of her bones! Behold the anguish of guilt preying upon her mind, and the inclemencies of the sky upon her body! If thou art a female, tremble and avoid; if a man, pity the sufferer, and detest seduction! 
 In the situation I have described, was Charlotte found at midnight, freezing upon a step, by the master of the family, who happened to be detained till that late hour. He was not a man of marble; and he enquired with eagerness and pity, if she had no place to go to that could, in some measure, screen her from the miseries she was thus exposed to. She faintly replied, no! but that she believed she should not long need assistance from hard-hearted man, for that if her feelings informed her right, she was dying. He knocked with precipitation at the door, and was asked by a voice, sweet as melody, and mild as pity, "Is it you, my love?" His affirmation gained him instant admittance. He took the light, rang the bell for his servants, and, with the help of his wife, assisted Charlotte into the house. "Here is a poor wretch, my dear, whom I found starving at the door, who tells me she believes she is dying." "God help her she shall not die in the street," answered she with her eyes glistening "Let us set her towards
 
the fire, my love, and give her a cordial that may revive her spirits good God!" continued she, "I think I should know that face surely it is not" "Who, Maria? do not alarm yourself, my love:" "You are right," answered Charlotte, "it is the wicked, the unfortunate Charlotte Woodland, your sister come in her last moments to shew her own guilt and sufferings, and to admire your mercy and your virtues. Oh! pity her Forgive her if you can!" 
 Merciful God! exclaimed Maria and sunk into the arms of her husband. 
 
 
 
 
 FANNY. 
 Oh, poor Charlotte! But mamma, I shall never be like her. 
 
 
 MRS. EGERTON. 
 No, my dear, God forbid you ever should: you have been differently educated. 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 I have often told you, my dears, and I cannot too often repeat it, that you will have no excuse if you should not behave well, because no means have been neglected to instruct you. The sins of Charlotte
 
may find forgiveness from the follies of her parents. Judge for yourselves whether you can make the same apology. By saying this I do not mean to court your applause; we have done nothing more than our duty. The duties of a parent are so numerous, and demand such an unremitting attention, that, indeed, I never can hope to fulfil them perfectly. However, my children, I hope we have omitted none of the great essentials, none that can sanctify the plea of ignorance for crimes, or for capital errors. In proportion as you have been made acquainted with right and wrong, so will it be expected that you should act; according to the adage "Where much is given much is required." 
 
 Many neglect their duty only because they do not know it; that, my children, we will endeavour shall not be the case with any of you. Polemo was one of the most abandoned youths of Athens: he seemed to delight not only in vice, but its infamy likewise. As he was returning one morning after sun-rise from a nocturnal revel, he saw the gate of Xenocrates, the philosopher, standing open, in whose school there were then assembled a number of grave and learned men. Shameless, and full of wine, smeared with ointments, a garland on his head, and cloathed in loose and indecent robes, he rudely entered the assembly with an air of ridiculous gravity; sat himself down, and began purposely to offend them with his drunken follies. All present were irritated at his behaviour, Xenocrates alone excepted. He
 
with the same undisturbed and serene dignity left the subject he was speaking upon, and began to discourse on temperance and modesty in so animated and forcible a tone, that Polemo, struck with a sense of the absurdity and indecency of his own conduct, and ashamed of his affected festivity, cast the crown from his brows, drew his arms beneath his cloak, and assumed a deportment suitable to the humiliating circumstances of his situation. He afterwards became one of the most celebrated philosophers of that age. From this we may safely infer, he would never have been guilty of such disgraceful improprieties, had he before been better taught. 
 I am now going to recommend a duty intimately connected with what we have been reading and saying; which is Industry. It is the unhappiness of wealthy people to imagine, at least much too often, that they have no other avocations in this world, but the pursuit of pleasure and the decoration of their persons, both of which, when carried to the least excess, become criminal. I would have you understand, my children, that though you are born to fortunes, you are not born to indolence. It is the duty of the rich at least to be active; not to mention, that to be idle is to be unhappy. Listen to she following allegory. 
 AS Industry was going abroad early to his labour, and climbing, with great patience, a lofty mountain over which he was obliged to pass, he espied on the
 
summit a beautiful nymph employed in searching for uncommon flowers, and often viewing with great attention the wide extended scenes that were stretched around her. Her eyes were piercing as the beams of the evening star, with a certain twinkling wantonness in them that heightened the resemblance. Her features were irregular, yet not less pleasing than those of a more perfect beauty. She had a most agreeable wildness in her air, her dress, her countenance; and something so speakably inquisitive in the latter, that almost every feature seemed to ask a question. Upon the approach of Industry she fell into immediate discourse with him, and asked him, almost in the same breath, who he was, where he lived, whither he was going, and what there was in the neighbourhood worth seeing. Industry, ever accustomed to make the best of his time, answered the last question first. He told her that there was nothing so well worth seeing as a beautiful pleasure-house in the adjacent wood, and offered to conduct her to it. The nymph, whose name was Curiosity, eagerly followed him, and by the numberless questions she put to him as they passed, discovered an insatiable thirst after knowledge. Industry, who liked the humour of the nymph, failed not to make every possible advantage of this; and though she found herself deceived in some points, when she arrived at the wood, yet she was gratified in so many others, that she could not help loving her deceiver, and yielding to every proposal of his that might tend
 
to her information. In consequence of this conversation, Curiosity, in due time, brought forth a son, who, by order from the Sylvan Deities, was named Travel. He was favoured by all the gods, and in his youth was frequently instructed by them in visions. As he grew up he discovered in his temper his mother's thirst of knowledge, and his father's activity; he never staid longer in any place than, bee-like, to collect the sweets that he found there. Pleasure and Wisdom were his companions, and his attendants were Plenty and Variety. By observing the manners and customs of various nations, he became polite and unprejudiced; and by comparing their laws, and various modes of worship and government, he learned to be just and politic, and to serve the gods acceptably. In a large city, where much was to be seen, he had recourse for accommodations to the house of a gentleman who was known to take a pleasure in entertaining travellers. The name of this person was Idleness. He was a corpulent good-natured man. If he had but provision for the day, and a companion to laugh away the hours, which were otherwise tedious to him, he was contented. He never interfered in the interest of others, nor felt the emotions either of friendship or enmity. He would not, on any account, go two furlongs from his own door, but used to say, pleasure and trouble were such inveterate enemies, that they could not possibly meet upon the same occasion; he was much entertained with the conversation of Travel, and conceiving
 
a design to dissuade him from rambling any more, that he might keep him with him, "My friend, said Idleness, I am amazed at your strange disposition. Who, like you, would for ever wander about, in search of pleasure, and not stand still a moment to enjoy it? Why will you expose yourself to perpetual dangers, and needless difficulties, and undergo abroad a thousand inconveniencies which you would never meet with at home? Why should you, who are a free man, submit to the arbitrary government of a sea captain; more boisterous than the element on which he commands: or to the no less absolute sway of an itinerant coachman?" "Truce with your queries, said Travel, till I have proposed an equal number; and then, if you please, we will balance the account. How can you waste your time, and impair your health by refusing to give your body and mind that due exercise nature so loudly calls for? How can you confine that arduous curiosity, which was implanted in the soul to urge you on to unbounded knowledge, within the narrow limits of a single city or province? Are you really so destitute of courage as to be over-awed by visionary dangers and trivial inconveniencies?" Here ended the dispute; Idleness would not be at the pains to urge further arguments, nor, if he had, would Travel have staid to hear them. 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 I will continue the subject, by reading you a little essay, which I once wrote in answer to a friend of
 
mine, who seemed to be of opinion, that it was rational, and almost virtuous, for men to be idle till they could have their property wholly to themselves: that is, he looked upon the taxes paid to civil and ecclesiastical establishments not only to be enormous, but shamefully misapplied. Though this assertion has too many glaring and notorious facts in its support to leave any room for controversy on that head, yet I never could think my friend's inference a just one. What I have said was, however, but a slight and hasty sketch, and will be more suitable as a lesson to my children, than an answer to the arguments of my friend. The best part of it is the fable with which it concludes, and from which I would have you draw the moral which is intended, namely, that the application of industry should be to great and proper objects, otherwise it becomes either trivial, ridiculous, or criminal. 
 
 
 
 
 INDUSTRY: An ESSAY. 
 The general importance of industry to society is a thing so self-evident, that it stands in need of no arguments to convince mankind of its truth. Individuals are neither happy in themselves, nor useful to others, till they are industrious. Idleness resembles an excrescence painful in itself, and disgusting to the beholders; and which the possessor wishes to cut away, but wants resolution. Some men, like benevolent philosophers, and true friends to the rights of
 
mankind, wish for absolute freedom, that men may be encouraged to industry by having their property sole, and undivided, to their own use; that they may not be shackled by the degrading recollection of dependence, nor deterred by the rapacity of power; that is, by those men who formally seize upon, and lawfully rob you of, a certain part of your property, which they appropriate, too frequently, to the most destructive purposes: namely, to that of enslaving you still farther. 
 That there are wicked governments, nay, that there are no good governments, and that there are wicked men in the best of governments, may readily be admitted. That a society formed upon the liberal principles these philosophers so justly admire, would be the only rational one among equals is likewise granted: but the fact is, men are not equal, and this inequality precludes the possibility of absolute freedom. The cunning man outwits the simple, the strong subdues the weak; the man whose passions are inordinate, wilfully enslaves himself to him who can gratify them, and he who has had the misfortune to have had a foolish, or a weak father, becomes, unhappily, the inheritor of slavery. This slavery, however, is only partial: in the very worst of governments, the motives to industry are sufficiently powerful and beneficial to incite men to action. Englishmen, in particular, have, upon comparison, great reason to bless that chance which placed them on this spot rather than the generality of
 
others; rather, perhaps, than any other upon earth. Property is, here, so far secured, that no depredations can be committed, but authorized and legal ones: and, though it must be confessed that these are numerous, yet the aggregate is not sufficient, by any means, to damp the spirit of industry. No titled villain lays his rapacious talons on the widow's mite; no tyrant fastens his disgraceful badge upon her offspring; no ferocious Boyar or Vaivod enumerates the husbandman among the other animals that graze upon what he unjustly calls his land. We are protected, not only from the ravages of individuals, but from the ravages of nations; and the exactions we suffer make our part of the contribution to the general expence. That these contributions are continually perverted cannot be denied; but, till we can find men who do not love themselves better than the rest of mankind, this must ever be the case. I do not mean to insinuate, that we should rest contented under imposition, however sanctified by the hoary head of custom, or enforced by the iron hand of law: no, let us emancipate ourselves by every worthy means, let us cast off every disgraceful, galling chain; let us beware that it does not become heavier, and more galling; but, it is the persevering effort of industry only that can effect this: and, as passions, affections, and weaknesses, prevent us from any thing like perfection, do not let us torment ourselves, and slacken our labours, by meditating on, and hoping for, ideal blessings,
 
which the nature and inequality of man forbid to be realized. I speak as I think, as I feel, but with every deference and respect to the arguments of those who hold contrary opinions. 
 Let us amuse ourselves, for a moment, by imagining the poetical origin, and actions of industry. 
 In the early ages of the world, before men multiplied and spread over the face of the earth, and, by their irregularities, banished the beneficent Deities from their society, the Sylvan God of the Oaks, called Perseverance, became in love with Agility, the nymph of the rocks; and though he was neither young, beautiful, or beloved, yet, by his incessant importunities, he at length prevailed. The nymphs of ancient, as well as modern times, have often yielded to importunity. The child Industry was the offspring of this amour. He was the beloved of his parents, for he partook of those qualities for which each was the most esteemed. He was strong and active, with an ugly countenance, and broad hands; he was not very tall, but his body was well proportioned, and his large limbs proclaimed duration. The sports of his infancy were peculiar. He sometimes amused himself with inventing instruments of housewifery and agriculture, and for other useful and domestic purposes; and, it is said, his mother one day surprized him when he had just finished the first rude sketch of a spinning-wheel, and was diverting himself with turning it round, and observing its effects. The loom, likewise, is said
 
to have been one of the early efforts of his imagination; and which procured him everlasting honour and praise among men. He presently became a constant and studious observer of cause and effect; and made registers of his observations, at first, by notching the trees, afterwards by hieroglyphics, and, last of all, by various and amazingly intricate combinations of characters, which yet, by his excessive assiduity, became tolerably simple, and quite intelligible. This, however, was the effect of incessant and undescribable labour; for it is said by some, that, till he came among men, and instructed them, they had no regular method of conveying their ideas; that they had no language, but gabbled a few inarticulate and unintelligible sounds, expressive of rage and fear, and some of the stronger passions, from which he produced his system. Long, however, before this, he discovered, by his penetration, the metals that lay hid and buried in the bowels of the earth; and that had lain there from time immemorial. He brought forth iron from a stone, and made of it the axe, the hoe, the saw, and a thousand curious and useful implements. He observed the swine, that used to root up the ground for the acorn, the pignut, and other delicacies: he saw the green verdure follow their tracks, and the young blade shoot where they had soiled: from whence he learned the use of the plough and the manure. Nothing was too vile to escape his attention, nor was any thing too incomprehensible to elude his enquiries. He presently
 
became so renowned, by the beneficial effects of his researches and labours, that he was deified, placed with the gods, and worshipped under various symbols by the sons of men. In the mean time his labours overspread the face of the earth: he not only built habitations for men, defended them from wild beasts, took care of their seed time and harvest, and taught them the common arts of life, but he, also, instructed them in the occult properties of nature. He shewed them to heal their wounds by the green herb, to exterminate poison, and to calculate the course of the stars. For their pleasure and convenience he built cities, palaces, and temples. Mausoleums, pyramids, and towers, rose from the hard entrails of the rock. Mountains were levelled, rivers obeyed the course of his directing arm, and castles floated upon the great waters, and defied their fury. 
 Happy had it been for men, had he been as prudent in his amours as his father; but, alas! he became enamoured with that prostitute Luxury. Fascinated by her seducing charms, and led astray by her specious sophisms, his labours have degenerated, have become destructive, and, instead of his former stupendous works, he is, at present, a Man-milliner, stains tooth-picks, weaves gauze ribbands, and metamorphoses second-hand sarsnet, and twice-died Persian, into artificial flowers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DIALOGUE XIX. 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 THE subject of yesterday, my children, is so consequential to happiness, that I cannot avoid renewing it, in order to point out some more of its duties and advantages, and impress them still stronger on your memories. Perseverance is the leading characteristic of industry. By perseverance, men of moderate parts have accomplished what had before been deemed impossible. Listen to the rapidity, the astonishingly precise agreement of ideas, in a band of musicians; look at the exact and mechanical precision with which one man at the head of an army regulates the actions of ten, twenty, or of a hundred thousand, and you will be convinced of the powers of perseverance. 
 A country gentleman had an estate of two hundred a year, which he kept in his own hands till he found himself so much in debt, that he was obliged to sell one half to satisfy his creditors, and lett the remainder to a farmer for one-and-twenty years. Before the expiration of his lease, the farmer asked the gentleman, when he came one day to pay his rent, whether he would sell the land he occupied? Why; will you buy it? said the gentleman; if you will part with it,
 
and we can agree, replied the farmer. That is exceedingly strange, said the gentleman. Pray tell me how it happens that I could not live upon twice as much land, for which I paid no rent, and that you, after regularly paying me a hundred a year for the half, are able, in a few years, to purchase it? The reason is plain, answered the farmer; you sat still, and said go; I got up, and said come; you laid in bed, and enjoyed your ease; I rose in the morning, and minded my business. 
 Hear another anecdote, more singular, but of the same nature. When collection was making to build the hospital of Bedlam, those who were employed to gather the money, came to a small house, the door of which was half open; from the entry they overheard an old man scolding his servant maid, who, having made use of a match to kindle the fire, had afterwards indiscreetly thrown it away, without reflecting that the match, having still the sulphur at the other end might be of further service. After diverting themselves awhile with listening to the dispute, they knocked, and presented themselves before the old gentleman. As soon as they told him the cause of their visit, he went into a closet, from whence he brought four hundred guineas, and reckoning the money in their presence, put it into their bag. The collectors being astonished at this generosity, which they little expected, could not help testifying their surprise, and told the old fellow what they had heard. "Gentleman, said he, your surprise
 
is occasioned by a thing of very little consequence; I keep house, and save or spend money my own way, the one furnishes me with the means of doing the other, and both equally gratify my inclinations. With regard to benefactions and donations, always expect most from prudent people who keep their accounts." 
 Few things truly great or good, my children, can be performed but by a persevering industry. Noble minds, with such assistance, are makers of their own fortune. There is scarcely any knowledge, any art, or any dignity unattainable to those who possess understanding, industry and perseverance. An attention to little things, with a capability of great ones, are the leading features of the character I describe. When Sir Walter Raleigh first came to London to seek his fortune, he was poor and unknown, yet well-dressed, carrying all his riches upon his back; for his hopes and views were comprehensive. Happening one day to see Queen Elizabeth walking till she came to a dirty place, at which she seemed to make some scruple of stepping over, he immediately pulled off his new plush cloak, and spread it for her to tread on. The gallantry of this action, and the obliging unembarassed air with which it was performed, were a certain introduction to the court of Elizabeth. When he first began to be noticed, he wrote upon a glass window, in the eye of the Queen: 
 Fain would I climb, but that I fear to fall. 
 Elizabeth observing it, wrote underneath,
 If thy heart fail thee, do not climb at all. 
 Sir Walter was not really afraid, this was only an artifice. Every body knows how great a man he afterwards became. 
 When the Spartans had treacherously seized on the castle called Cadmaea, and by that means enslaved the Thebans, Archias, one of the governors in the Spartan interest, was sitting at a feast. He received letters which he was desired to open and read immediately, for they contained information of the greatest importance; but Archias being full of mirth, and heated with wine, threw them by, and said, laughing, "business to-morrow." This negligence cost him his life, for that very evening Pelopidas, Charon, and others, having formed a resolution to free their country, slew him, and many more, who were in the Spartan interest, which scarcely could have happened had Archias read the letters, they being sent purposely to inform him of his danger. "Business to-morrow" became ever after a satirical proverb in Greece. 
 I tell you these anecdotes, my children, to shew you the consequences of negligence, and the benefits arising from perseverance, vigilance, and industry;
 
and I cannot better instruct you to what purposes these great and necessary properties ought to be applied, than by referring you to the fable of Mirza. 
 
 
 
 
 SOCIAL DUTY, Or MIRZA. 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 IT pleased the mighty sovereign Abbas Carascan, from whom the Kings of the earth derive honour and dominion, to set Mirza his servant over the province of Tauris. In the hand of Mirza, the balance of distribution was suspended with impartiality; and under his administration the weak were protected, the learned received honour, and the diligent became rich: Mirza, therefore, was beheld by every eye with complacency, and every tongue pronounced blessings upon his head. But it was observed that he derived no joys from the benefits which he diffused; he became pensive and melancholy; he spent his leisure in solitude; in his palace he sat motionless upon a sopha; and when he went out, his walk was slow, and his eyes were fixed upon the ground: he applied to the business of state with reluctance; and resolved to relinquish the toils of government, of which he could no longer enjoy the reward. 
 He therefore obtained permission to approach the throne of his sovereign; and being asked what was
 
his request, he made this reply, "May the Lord of the world forgive the slave whom he has honoured, if Mirza presume again to lay the bounty of Abbas at his feet. Thou hast given me the dominions of a country, fruitful as the gardens of Damascus: and of a city, glorious above all others, except that only which reflects the splendor of thy presence. But the longest life is a period scarce sufficient to prepare for death. All other business is vain and trivial, as the toil of emmets in the path of the traveller, under whose foot they perish for ever; and all enjoyment is unsubstantial and evanescent, as the colours of the bow that appear in the interval of a storm. Suffer me, therefore, to prepare for the approach of eternity; let me give up my soul to meditation; let solitude and silence acquaint me with the mysteries of devotion; let me forget the world, and by the world be forgotten, till the moment arrives in which the veil of eternity shall fall, and I be found at the bar of the Almighty." Mirza then bowed himself to the earth, and stood silent. 
 By the command of Abbas it is recorded, that at these words he trembled upon that throne, at the footstool of which the world pays homage: he looked round upon his nobles, but every countenance was pale, and every eye was upon the earth. No man opened his mouth; and the King first broke silence after it had continued near an hour. 
 "Mirza! terror and doubt are come upon me: I am alarmed, as a man who suddenly perceives that
 
he is near the brink of a precipice, and is urged forward by an irresistible force; but yet I know not whether my danger is a reality or a dream. I am as thou art, a reptile on the earth; my life is a moment; and eternity, in which days, and years, and ages are nothing, eternity is before me, for which I also should prepare: but by whom then must the faithful be governed? By those only who have no fear of judgment? By those alone whose life is brutal, because like brutes, they do not consider that they shall die? Or who, indeed, are the faithful? Are the busy multitudes that crowd the city, in a state of perdition? And is the cell of the dervise alone the gate of paradise? To all, the life of a dervise is not possible: to all therefore it cannot be a duty. Depart to the house which has in the city been prepared for thy residence; I will meditate the reason of thy request; and may he who illuminates the mind of the humble, enable me to determine with wisdom!" 
 Mirza departed; and on the third day, having received no commands, he again requested an audience, and it was granted. When he entered the royal presence, his countenance appeared more chearful; he drew a letter from his bosom, and having kissed it, he presented it with his right-hand. 
 "My Lord, says he, I have learned by this letter, which I received from Cosrou the Iman, who now stands before thee, in what manner life may be best improved. I am enabled to look back with pleasure, and forward with hope; and I shall now rejoice still
 
to be the shadow of thy power at Tauris, and to keep those honours which I so lately wished to resign." The King, who had listened to Mirza with a mixture of surprise and curiosity, immediately gave the letter to Cosrou, and commanded that it should be read. The eyes of the court were at once turned on the hoary sage, whose countenance was suffused with an honest blush; and it was not without some hesitation that he read these words: 
 "To Mirza, whom the wisdom of Abbas our mighty Lord has honoured with dominion, be everlasting health! When I heard thy purpose to withdraw the blessings of thy government from the thousands of Tauris, my heart was wounded with the arrow of affliction, and my eyes became dim with sorrow. But who shall speak before the King, when he is troubled? and who shall boast of knowledge, when he is distressed by doubt? To thee I will relate the events of my youth, which thou hast renewed before me; and those truths which they taught me, may the prophet multiply to thee. 
 "Under the instruction of the physician Aluazer, I obtained an early knowledge of his art. To those who were smitten with diseases, I could administer plants, which the sun had impregnated with the spirits of health. But the scenes of pain, languor, and mortality, which were perpetually rising before me, made me often tremble for myself. I saw the grave open at my feet: I determined, therefore, to contemplate only the regions beyond it, and to despise
 
every acquisition that I could not keep. I conceived an opinion, that as there was no merit but in voluntary poverty, and silent meditation, those who desired money were not proper objects of bounty; therefore money was despised. I buried mine in the earth; and renouncing society, I wandered into a wild and sequestered part of the country; my dwelling was a cave, by the side of a hill; I drank the running water from the spring, and eat such fruits and herbs as I could find. To increase the austerity of my life, I frequently watched all night, sitting at the entrance of the cave with my face to the east, resigning myself to the secret influences of the prophet, and expecting illuminations from above. One morning, after my nocturnal vigil, just as I perceived the horizon glow at the approach of the sun, the power of sleep became irresistible, and I sunk under it. I imagined myself still sitting at the entrance of my cell; that the dawn increased; and that as I looked earnestly for the first beam of day, a dark spot appeared to intercept it. I perceived that it was in motion; it increased in size as it drew near, and at length I discovered it to be an eagle. I still kept my eye steadfastly upon it, and saw it alight at a small distance, where I now descried a fox, whose fore-legs appeared to be broken. Before this fox the eagle laid part of a kid, which it had brought in its talons, and then disappeared. When I awaked I laid my fore-head upon the ground, and blessed the prophet for the instruction of the morning.
 
I reviewed my dream, and said thus to myself, "Cosrou, thou hast done well to renounce the tumult, the business, and the vanities of life; but thou hast as yet only done it in part; thou art still every day busied in the search of food, thy mind is not wholly at rest, neither is thy trust in Providence complete. What art thou taught by this vision? If thou hast seen an eagle commissioned by heaven to feed a fox that is lame, shall not the hand of heaven also supply thee with food, when that which prevents thee from procuring it to thyself, is not necessity, but devotion? I was now so confident of a miraculous supply, that I neglected to walk out for my repast, which, after the first day, I expected with an impatience that left me little power of attending to any other object: this impatience, however, I laboured to suppress, and persisted in my resolution; but my eyes at length began to fail me, and my knees smote each other; I threw myself backward, and hoped my weakness would soon increase to insensibility. But I was suddenly roused by the voice of an invisible being, who pronounced these words: "Cosrou, I am the angel who, by the command of the Almighty, have registered the thoughts of thy heart, which I am now commissioned to reprove. While thou wast attempting to become wise above that which is revealed, thy folly perverted the instructions which was vouchsafed thee. Art thou disabled as the fox? Hast thou not rather the powers of the eagle? Arise, let the eagle be the object of
 
thy emulation. To pain and sickness be thou again the messenger of ease and health. Virtue is not rest but action. If thou dost good to man, as an evidence of thy love to God, thy virtue will be exalted from moral to divine; and that happiness which is the pledge of paradise, will be thy reward upon earth." 
 "At these words I was not less astonished than if a mountain had been overturned at my feet. I humbled myself in the dust; I returned to the city; I dug up my treasure; I was liberal, yet I became rich. My skill in restoring health to the body, gave me frequent opportunities of curing the diseases of the soul. I put on the sacred vestments; I grew eminent beyond my merit; and it was the pleasure of the King that I should stand before him. Now, therefore, be not offended; I boast of no knowledge that I have not received: as the sands of the desart drink up the drops of rain and the dew of the morning, so do I also, who am but dust, imbibe the instructions of the prophet. Believe then that it is he who tells thee, all knowledge is prophane which terminates in thyself; and by a life wasted in speculation, little even of this can be gained. When the gates of paradise are thrown open before thee, thy mind shall be irradiated in a moment; here thou canst little more than pile error upon error; there thou shalt build truth upon truth. Wait therefore for the glorious vision; and in the mean time emulate the eagle. Much is in thy power; and, therefore,
 
much is expected of thee. Though the Almighty alone can give virtue, yet, as a Prince, thou mayest stimulate those to beneficence, who act from no higher motive than immediate interest. Thou canst not produce the principle, but mayest enforce the practice. The relief of the poor is equal, whether they receive it from ostentation or charity; and the effect of example is the same, whether it be intended to obtain the favour of God, or man. Let thy virtue be thus diffused; and if thou believest with reverence, thou shalt be accepted above. Farewell. May the smile of him who resides in the heaven of heavens, be upon thee! And against thy name in the volume of his will, may happiness be written!" 
 The King, whose doubts, like those of Mirza, were now removed, looked up with a smile that communicated the joy of his mind. He dismissed the Prince to his government; and commanded these events to be recorded, to the end that posterity may know, "That no life is pleasing to God, but that which is useful to mankind!" 
 
 
 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 The active spirit of industry, when properly exerted, is replete with every social virtue; yet even this necessary, this great quality, when perverted, becomes the scourge of humanity. 
 The Sultan Mahmoud was ambitious of fame, and intent on actions which he deemed worthy of princes;
 
that is, of conquering kingdoms, wasting provinces, and exterminating mankind with fire and sword. He had a Visier, who was a man renowned for his sagacity. This Visier was said to be well-skilled in the language of birds and beasts. As he was one day conversing with Mahmoud, they saw two owls; pray, said the Sultan to the Visier, what is the present subject of conversation between those owls? Commander of the Faithful, answered the Visier, thy servant would gladly interpret their discourse, but he is fearful of the frowns of majesty, which are dreadful even as the sword of the angel of death. By the beard of Mahomet, said the Sultan, no harm shall happen to thee; inform me of what they are speaking. They are speaking, said the Visier, concerning the marriage of their children. The one says, he will not suffer his son to marry the daughter of the other, but on condition of his giving her fifty ruined villages for her portion. This has been very readily agreed to, "blessed, say they, be the sword of Mahmoud, and may his days be multiplied, for while he reigns, we shall never want ruined villages." Mahmoud, says the fabulist, was wise, and saw his error; neither did he any more slay men, destroy their cities, and disturb the peace of nations. 
 
 
 MRS. EGERTON to MR. EGERTON. 
 When, my dear, you were speaking concerning perseverance, you reminded me of an account
 
which I saw some time since, of a German shepherd, who, under the most discouraging impediments, taught himself the rudiments of philosophy and abstruse science. Here it is, do you read it, Charles, it will shew you what this aforesaid perseverance and industry enabled him to perform without teachers; and will hint to you, my children, how much you may do with the same application, and the assistance you continually receive. 
 
 
 
 
 PERSEVERANCE: Or the HISTORY of Professor DU VAL. 
 M. DU VAL, professor of history and geography in the academy of Luneville, is the son of a peasant, and born in Burgundy, but came into Lorrain when a child, and was employed as a shepherd's boy, at a village near Nancy. His thirst after knowledge appeared in his very childhood, and, having no other means of gratifying it, he made a collection of snakes, frogs, &c. amused himself with examining these creatures, and was continually asking the neighbouring peasants why those animals were formed in such a particular manner? but the answers he received were generally such, as left him less satisfied than he was before. He once happened to see, in the hand of a country boy, Aesop's Fables with cuts, which made him still more desirous of learning than before. He could not read; and the boy,
 
who was capable of gratifying his curiosity, was seldom in a humour to explain the animals, &c. represented in the cuts. In this distress, he determined to make himself master of the introduction to knowledge, however great the difficulties that attended it might prove. Accordingly he saved whatever money he could get, and gave it to other boys who were older than himself, for teaching him to read. Having, with incredible diligence, attained his end, he happened to meet with an almanack, in which the twelve signs of the zodiac were delineated. These he looked for so constantly, and with such attention, in the heavens, that at last he imagined that he actually traced such figures there; and though he was mistaken in this and several other particulars, yet many of his observations were such as few others are found capable of, even after receiving regular instructions. 
 As he once passed by a print-shop at Nancy, he observed in the window a map of the world. This opened a field for new speculations; and, having purchased it, he employed many hours every day in perusing it. At first he took the degrees on the equator for French leagues; but upon considering that, in coming from Burgundy to Lorrain, he had travelled many such leagues, though on his map that distance seemed to take up a very little spot, he was convinced of the impossibility of his first conjecture. But it must have been with incredible labour, and at the same time is a signal proof of his extraordinary
 
genius, that he acquired a thorough knowledge of these and many other signatures on the several maps; which, as often as his purse could afford it, he afterwards procured. 
 His inclination for silence and retirement, made him weary of living among the noisy peasant boys; and induced him to visit some hermits who had their cells in a wood, about half a league from Luneville. He undertook to wait on them, and to tend six or eight cows which they kept. These hermits were, however, grossly ignorant; but Du Val had an opportunity of reading several books he found in their cells, and of getting many difficulties, that occurred to him, solved by persons who came to visit them. All the money he could scrape together in his mean circumstances, was laid out in books and maps; and observing, on some of the latter, the arms of several princes, as griffins, spread eagles, lions with two tails, and other monsters, he enquired of a foreigner, whether there were any such creatures in the world? being informed that these figures belonged to a particular science called heraldry, he minuted down this word, before unknown to him, and hurrying with all speed to Nancy, bought a book of heraldry, and by that book, without any other help, he became master of the fundamental principles of that science. 
 In this course of life Du Val continued till he arrived at his one-and-twentieth year, when, in the autumn of 1717, he was discovered watching his charge in the wood, and sitting under a tree with
 
his maps and books about him, by Baron Psutchner. This gentleman was then governor to the young Prince of Lorrain, who happened to hunt that way. The Baron thought a herdsman, with sun-burnt lank hair, dressed in a coarse linen frock, with a heap of maps about him, so extraordinary a sight, that he informed the Prince of it, who immediately rode towards the place, and put several questions to Du Val about his way of living. Du Val shewed by his answers, that he was already master of the grounds of several sciences. Upon which the Prince offered to take him into his service, and told him that he should go to court. Du Val, who had read in some books of morality, that the air of a court was infectious to virtue; and had also observed when he had been at Nancy, that the lacqueys of great men were a riotous, debauched, quarrelsome sort of people, frankly answered, "That he chose rather to look after his herd, and continue to lead a quiet life in the wood, with which he was thoroughly satisfied, than to wait on the Prince; but added, that if his highness would give him an opportunity of reading curious books, and of making himself master of more learning and knowledge, he was ready to follow him or any body else." The Prince was highly pleased with his answer; and, when he returned to court, prevailed on the Duke his father, to send this extraordinary herdsman to the Jesuits College at Pont-a-Mousson. When be had finished his studies at that seat of learning,
 
the Duke permittted him to take a journey into France for his further improvement; and, soon after his return, gave him a professorship in the academy of Luneville, with a pension of 700 livres a year, also made him his own librarian, which is worth 1000 livres a year more, besides a handsome apartment. 
 He is of a most engaging modesty and politeness, and, far from being ashamed of his former low condition, takes a pleasure in relating the successive and gradual rise of new ideas in his mind, and the pleasing tranquillity and uninterrupted content he enjoyed in a situation, in all appearance, mean and despicable. He still keeps an apartment in the hermitage, from whence the Duke raised him to his present condition; and, to perpetuate his memory of the transaction, has had his picture drawn, in which he is represented just as he was, when discovered by Baron Psutchner, under a tree, with a landscape of the place, and the Prince talking to him; this piece he has obtained leave to hang up in the Duke's library. 
 
 
 
 
 NANCY. 
 Here is a humourous essay, mamma, which Miss Forrester has pointed out to me, that I think will divert us, if you will please to hear it. We could not tell whether the writer meant to teach any particular duty; however, I dare say, my father will draw instruction as well as amusement from it, and shew us its moral intention. 
 
 
 
 MRS. EGERTON. 
 Well, my dear, pray let us hear it. 
 
 
 
 
 HEALTH: Or the VICAR. 
 GOING to visit an old friend at his country seat last week, I found him at backgammon with the Vicar of the parish. My friend received me with the heartiest welcome, and introduced the Doctor to my acquaintance. This gentleman, who seemed to be about fifty, and of a florid and healthy constitution, surveyed me all over with great attention, and, after a slight nod of the head, sat himself down without opening his mouth. I was a little hurt at the supercilious behaviour of this divine; which my friend observing told me very pleasantly, that I was rather too old to be intitled to the Doctor's complaisance; for that he seldom bestowed it, but upon the young and vigorous: But, says he, you shall know him better soon, and you will find him altogether as odd a character, as he is a worthy one. The Doctor made no reply to this raillery, but continued some time with his eyes fixed upon me, and at last, shaking his head, and turning to my friend, asked if he would play out the other hit. My friend excused himself from engaging any more that evening, and ordered a bottle of wine, with pipes and tobacco, to be set on the table. The Vicar filled
 
his pipe, and drank very cordially to my friend, still eyeing me with a seeming dislike, and neither drinking my health, nor speaking a single word to me. As I have long accustomed myself to drink nothing but water, I called for a bottle of it, and drank glass for glass with them; which upon the Doctor's observing, he shook his head at my friend, and, in a whisper loud enough for me to hear, said, 'Poor man, it is all over with him, I see.' My friend smiled, and answered, in the same audible whisper, 'No, no, Doctor, he intends to live as long as either of us.' He then addressed himself to me on the occurrences of the town, and engaged me in a very chearful conversation, which lasted till I withdrew to rest; at which time the Doctor rose from his chair, drank a bumper to my health, and, giving me a hearty shake by the hand, told me I was a very jolly old gentleman, and that he wished to be better acquainted with me, during my stay in the country. 
 I rose early in the morning, and found the Doctor in the breakfasting room. He saluted me with great civility, and told me he had left his bed and home sooner than usual, to have the pleasure of taking a walk with me. 'Your friend, says he, is but lately recovered from an attack of the gout, and will hardly be stirring, till we have gone over his improvements.' I accepted the proposal, and we walked through a very elegant garden into the most beautiful fields that can be imagined; which as I stopped to admire, the Doctor began thus: 'These are, indeed, very
 
delightful grounds; and I wish, with all my heart, that the owner of them was less troubled with the gout, that I might hold him in more respect.' 'Respect! Doctor,' said I, interrupting him, 'Does a painful distemper, acquired by no act of intemperance, lessen your respect?' 'It does indeed, and I wish, in this instance, I could help it; for I am under many obligations to your friend. There is another very worthy gentleman in the neighbourhood, who presented me to this vicarage; he has the misfortune to labour under an inveterate scurvy, which, by subjecting him to continual head-achs, must, of course, shorten his days; and so I never go near him.' 
 I was going to interrupt the Doctor again, when a coach and six drove by us along the road, and in it a gentleman, who let down the glass, and made the Doctor a very respectful bow; which instead of returning, he looked off with a stately air, and took no notice of him. This instance of his behaviour, together with the conversation that had passed between us, raised my curiosity to a very high degree, and set me upon asking him who the gentleman was. 'Sir,' says he, 'that unfortunate object is a man of eight thousand a year estate; and, from that consideration, he expects the return of a bow from every man he meets. But I, who know him, know also that  dying of an asthma; and as (blessed be God for it) I am in perfect health, I do not chuse to put myself on a level with such a
 
person. Health is the only valuable thing on earth; and, while I am in possession of that, I look upon myself as a much greater man than he. With all his fortune, he would rejoice to be the poor Vicar of ***, with my constitution. I pull off my hat to no such persons. Believe me, he has not many months to live. 
 I made no reply to this conversation of the Vicar, and he went on thus: 'You are an old man, Sir, and, I believe, were a little fatigued with your journey last night, which I mistook for infirm health, and therefore was wanting in the civilities that I should otherwise have shewn you; but your conversation afterwards proved you to be a very hearty man, and I saw you resolved to continue so by your temperance; for which I honour you, and, as I told you then, shall be glad of your acquaintance. It is true, you are old, and therefore my inferior; but you are healthy and temperate, and not beneath the notice of much younger men.' 
 In this manner we talked on, till we came to a hedge, where some labouring men were repairing the sences. My companion accosted them with the utmost complaisance and good nature: 'Ay,' says he, turning to me, 'these are men worth mixing with. You see their riches in their looks. Have you any of your lords in town that have such possessions? I know none of these lords,' says he, 'myself, but I am told they are all so sickly and diseased, that a man in health would scorn to pull off his hat
 
to them.' He then entered into a familiar conversation with the men, and, after throwing them six-pence to drink, passed on. 
 There now overtook us in the lane a company of sportsmen, setting out for the chace. Most of them saluted the Doctor, as they passed; but he took no notice of any of them, except one, whom he shook hands with over the hedge, and told him he intended taking a dinner with him the next day. 'That gentleman, says he, is worth as much health as any man in England; he hunts only by way of exercise, and never takes a leap where there is the least danger. But, as for the rest, they are flying over every hedge and gate in their way, and, if they escape broken necks in the morning, they are destroying themselves more effectually by intemperance in the evening. No, no, these are no companions for me; I hope, with the blessing of Heaven, to outlive a score of them.' 
 We came, soon after, to a little neat house upon the road, where, the Doctor told me, lived a very agreeable widow lady, to whom he had formerly paid his addresses. 'She had at that time,' says he,' as large a fortune of health, as any woman in the county; but she has since mortgaged it to the apothecary for slops, and I have taken my leave of her. She was determined to be a widow, and so married an officer, who got his head knocked off at Fontenoy. These are a sort of men that I make no acquaintance with; they hold their lives on too precarious a tenure.'
 
'But they are useful members of society,' said I, 'and command our esteem.' 'That may be, Sir,' returned the Doctor, 'and so are the miners in our coal pits, who are every hour in danger of being buried alive. But there is a subordination of degree, which ought strictly to be observed; and a man in ill health, or of a dangerous profession, should not think himself on a level with people of sound constitutions and less hazardous employments.' 
 I was determined to interrupt the Doctor no more; and he went on thus: 'You may possibly think me an odd kind of a man; but I am no enemy to people of bad constitutions, nor ever withhold my bounty from them, when their necessities demand it; but, though I am doing them all the services in my power, I cannot consent to lower myself so far as to make them my companions. It is more in the power of the physician to confer rank, than the King; for the gifts of fortune are nothing; health is the only riches that a man ought to set a value on; and, without it, all men are poor, let their estates be what they will. If I differ from the common opinion in this particular, I do also in another. The tradesman or mechanic, who has acquired an estate by his industry, is seldom reckoned a gentleman; but it was always my sentiment, that a man, who makes his own constitution, has more merit in him, than he that was born with it; the one is the work of chance, the other of design; and it is for this reason that I am seen so often with your friend; for,
 
though the gout is generally an impoverishing distemper, yet temperance and regularity may in time subdue it; whereas the gentleman, who drove by us with his six horses, has an incurable asthma, which renders him, with his large estate, as poor as the beggar who is dying under a hedge. The more you think of these things, the more you will be of my opinion. A poor man in health is a companion for a king; but a lord without it is a poor man indeed: And why should he expect the homage of other people, when the very meanest of his domestics would refuse to change places with him.' 
 My companion was stopped short in his harangue by our arrival at my friend's house. We found him in good health and spirits, which greatly heightened the Vicar's complaisance; and, as I took care to conceal from him the complaints and infirmities of old age, I passed a very agreeable week, and was so much in his good graces, that, at my departure, he presented me with Dr. Turlington's balsam, and a paper of Dr. James's powder: 'There,' says he, 'they may rob you of your money, if they please; but, for bruises and fevers, you may set them at defiance.' 
 On my return home, I made many serious reflections on this whimsical character; and, in the end, could not help wishing, that, under certain limitations, the sentiments of the Vicar were a little more in fashion. Health is certainly the riches of life; and, if men were to derive their rank from that
 
alone, it would, in all probability, make them more careful to preserve it. Society might be benefited by it in another respect, as it would tend to keep complaining people at home, who are the perpetual disturbers of all companies abroad. 
 
 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Notwithstanding the whimsical turn which is given to this gentleman, I think his mode of estimating riches is exceedingly just. With respect to what is called wealth, every person must feel how inferior that is to a sound and good constitution; and even great virtues and abilities, without health, are useless to society. The moral, therefore, is strong and obvious, namely, that it is a duty we owe to society, to be careful of our health. 
 We are obliged to Miss Forrester for pointing out to us so ingenious and useful an essay. 
 
 
 
 DIALOGUE XX. 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 YOU know, my children, we are preparing to leave the peaceful retirement of the country, a little while, for town; there to see, and be seen;
 
there to remark the busy pursuits of men, in their chace after pleasure, wealth, fame, titles, or whatever else seems to them most desirable. When we are there, I shall endeavour, as I have before done, to turn these living lessons to your advantage; but as the present is the last conversation we shall enjoy in this place till our return, I will speak to you upon the subject which appears most immediately useful; I mean Decorum, and the guarded manner in which young people, who are not sufficiently aware of what are, and what are not improprieties, ought to behave. 
 Levity, though it sometimes is productive of gaiety, and the agreeably sallies which are so enlivening to conversation, has frequently, likewise, incurred the most poignant distress, and involved its possessors in irretrievable misery and misfortune. There are two sorts of levity equally to be avoided; a levity of tongue, and a levity of conduct: to indulge in either is dangerous, for they are equally difficult to subdue, when once habit has made them familiar. The loquacious barber of Athens is a strong instance of this truth. 
 A barber who kept a shop at the extremity of the city of Athens, was the first who heard of the defeat of the Athenians, in Sicily, from a slave who had fled from the field of battle. This barber, impatient to be the man who should first divulge the news, instantly left his shop, and ran into the city, telling every body what he had heard. These disagreeable
 
tidings presently occasioned a great tumult, and the people flocking to the market-place, surrounded the barber, and demanded how he came to the knowledge of this defeat; to which he could give no satisfactory answer, nor produce the least shadow of proof in support of his assertion, he having, in his eagerness to be the first narrator, forgot even so much as to enquire the name of the slave who had told him. This exasperated the people, who were very willing to believe the whole to be a lye of the barber's own invention, and, in their anger, they hurried him away, and stretched him upon the rack for an incendiary. In the mean time, however, a confirmation of the account arrived, and the people, eager to hear the particulars, ran and forgot the poor barber, leaving him upon the wheel; where he remained till the evening, when, at last, somebody recollecting him, he was taken down. No sooner was he released, than, instead of thinking about the pain he had suffered, or the cure of his hurts, he began to enquire the particulars of the battle, how many were prisoners, how many had escaped, whether the General was killed, and in what manner he died. 
 
 
 FANNY. 
 Dear papa, I have often heard how curious the women are! but do you think women are as fond of news, and tattling, as this barber? 
 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 Well bred and prudent women never are, my dear. But there are many men beside the barber of Athens, who have been greatly injured by the incontinence and levity of their tongues. You may learn this from the following history, which a certain young gentleman has given the world of his own imprudence. 
 
 
 
 
 YOUTHFUL LEVITY: Or the Necessity of knowing your COMPANY. 
 TO be courteous to all, but familiar with few, is a maxim which I once despised, as originally proceeding from a mean and contracted mind, the frigid caution of weakness and timidity. A tame and indiscriminate civility I imputed to a dread of the contempt or the petulance of others, to fears from which the wit and the gentleman are exempted by a consciousness of their own dignity, by their power to repress insolence, and silence ridicule; and a general shyness and reserve I considered as the reproach of our country, as the effect of an illiberal education, by which neither a polite address, an easy confidence, or a general acquaintance with public life, is to be acquired. This opinion, which continued to flatter the levity and pride that produced it, was strengthened by the example of those whose manner, in the diffidence of youth, I wished to imitate, who entered
 
a mixed company with an air of ferene familiarity, accosted every man like an old acquaintance, and thought only of making sport for the rest of any with whom their caprice should happen to be offended, without regard to their age, character, or condition. 
 But I now wish, that I had regulated my conduct by the maxim which I despised, for I should then have escaped a misfortune which I can never retrieve; and the sense of which I am now endeavouring to suspend, by relating it to you as a lesson to others, and considering my loss of happiness as an acquisition of wisdom. 
 While I was in France with a travelling tutor, I received a letter which acquainted me, that my father, who had been long declining, was dead; and that it was necessary I should immediately return to England, to take possession of his estate, which was not inconsiderable, though there were mortgages upon it to near half its value. 
 When I arrived, I found a letter which the old gentleman had written and directed to me with his own hand. It contained some general rules for my conduct, and some animadversions upon his own: he took notice of the incumbrance under which he left me the paternal inheritance, which had descended through many generations, and expressed the most earnest desire, that it might yet be transmitted intire to posterity: with this view, he said, he had negotiated a marriage between me and the only daughter
 
of his old friend, Sir George Homestead of the North, an amiable young lady, whose alliance would be an honour to my family, and whose fortune would much more than redeem my estate. 
 He had given the knight a faithful account of his affairs; who, after having taken some time to consider the proposal and consult his friends, consented to the match, upon condition that his daughter and I should prove agreeable to each other, and my behaviour should confirm the character which had been given of me. My father added, that he hoped to have lived till this alliance had taken place; but as Providence had otherwise determined, he intreated, as his last request, that as soon as my affairs should be settled and decency would permit, I would make Sir George a visit, and neglect nothing to accomplish his purpose. 
 I was touched with the zeal and tenderness of parental affection which was then directing me to happiness, after the heart that felt it had ceased to beat, and the hand that expressed it was mouldering in the dust. I had seen the lady, not indeed since we were children; but I remembered that her person was agreeable, and her temper sweet: I did not, therefore, hesitate a moment, whether my father's injunction should be obeyed. I proceeded to settle his affairs; I took an account of his debts and credits, visited the tenants, recovered my usual gaiety, and at the end of about nine months set out for Sir George's seat in the North; having before opened
 
an epistolary correspondence, and expressed my impatience to possess the happiness which my father had so kindly secured. 
 I was better pleased to be well mounted, than to loll in a chariot, or be jumbled in a post-chaise; and I knew that Sir George was an old sportsman, a plain hearty blade, who would like me better in a pair of buckskin breeches on the back of a good hunter, than in a trimmed suit and a gaudy equipage: I, therefore, set out on horseback with only one servant, and reached Stilton the first night. 
 In the morning, as I was mounting, a gentleman, who had just got on horseback before me, ordered his servant to make enquiry concerning the road, which I happened to overhear, and told him with great familiarity, that I was going the same way, and if he pleased we would travel together: to this he consented, with as much frankness, and as little ceremony; and I set forward, greatly delighted that chance had afforded me a companion. 
 We immediately entered into conversation, and I soon found that he had been abroad: we extolled the roads and the policy of France, the cities, the palaces, and the villas; entered into a critical examination of the most celebrated seats in England, the peculiarities of the building and situation, crossways, market-towns, the imposition of innkeepers, and the sports of the field; topics by which we mutually recommended ourselves to each other, as we had both opportunities to discover equal knowledge, and
 
to display truth with such evidence as prevented diversity of opinion. 
 After we had rode about two hours, we overtook another gentleman, whom we accosted with the same familiarity that we had used to each other; we asked him how far he was going and which way, at what rate he travelled, where he put up, and many other questions of the same kind. The gentleman, who appeared to be near fifty, received our address with great coolness, returned short and indirect answers to our enquiries, and, often looking with great attention on us both, sometimes put forward that he might get before us, and sometimes checked his horse that he might remain behind. But we were resolved to disappoint him; and, finding that his reserve increased, and he was visibly displeased, we winked at each other, and determined the old put should afford us some sport. After we had rode together upon very ill terms more than half an hour, my companion with an air of ceremonious gravity asked him, if he knew any house upon the road where he might be accommodated with an agreeable girl. The gentleman, who was, I believe, afraid of giving us a pretence to quarrel, did not resent this insult any otherwise than by making no reply. I then began to talk to my companion as if we had been old acquaintances, reminding him that the gentleman extremely resembled a person whom we had once seen coming out of a bagnio with a certain old acquaintance of ours; and, indeed, that his present
 
reserve made me suspect him to be the same; but that as we were willing to forget the affair, we hoped he would be so too, and that we should have the pleasure of dining together at the next inn. The gentleman was still silent; but as his perplexity and resentment visibly increased, he proportionably increased our entertainment, which did not, however, last long, for he suddenly turned down a lane; upon which we set up a horse laugh that continued till he was out of hearing, and then pursuing our journey, we talked of the adventure, which afforded us conversation and merriment for the rest of the day. 
 The next morning we parted, and in the evening I arrived at Homestead Hall. The old knight received me with great affection, and immediately introduced me to his daughter, whom I now thought the finest woman I had ever seen. I could easily discover, that I was not welcome to her merely upon her father's recommendation, and I enjoyed by anticipation the felicity which I considered as within my reach. But the pleasing scene, in which I had suffered my imagination to wander, suddenly disappeared as by the power of enchantment. Without any visible motive, the behaviour of the whole family was changed, my assiduities to the lady were repressed, she was never to be found alone, the knight treated me with a cold civility, I was no longer a party in their visits, nor was I willingly attended even by the servants. I made many attempts to discover
 
the cause of this misfortune, but without success; and one morning, when I had drawn Sir George into the garden by himself, and was about to urge him upon the subject, he prevented me by saying, that his promise to my father, for whom he had the highest regard, as I well knew, was conditional; that he had always resolved to leave his daughter a free choice, and that she had requested him to acquaint me, that her affections were otherwise engaged, and to entreat that I would, therefore, discontinue my addresses. My surprize and concern at this declaration, were such as left me no power to reply; and I saw Sir George turn from me and go into the house, without making any attempt to stop him, or to obtain a further explanation. Afterwards, indeed, I frequently expostulated, entreated, and complained; but, perceiving that all was ineffectual, I took my leave, and determined that I would still solicit by letter; for the lady had taken such possession of my heart, that I would joyfully have married her, though I had been sure that her father would immediately have left all his fortune to a stranger. 
 I meditated on my epistolary project all the way to London, and before I had been three days in town I wrote a long letter to Sir George, in which I conjured him, in the strongest terms, to account for the change in his behaviour; and insisted, that, on this occasion, to conceal the truth, was in the highest
 
degree dishonourable to himself, and injurious to me. 
 To this letter, after about ten days, I received the following answer: 
 
 SIR, 
 It is with great reluctance that I reveal the motives of my conduct, because they are much to your disadvantage. The inclosed is a letter which I received from a worthy gentleman in this county, and contains a full answer to your enquiries, which I had rather you should receive in any hand than in mine. 
 I am your humble servant, GEO. HOMESTEAD. 
 
 I immediately opened the paper inclosed, in which, with the utmost impatience, I read as follows: 
 
 SIR, 
 I saw a person with your family yesterday at the races, to whom, as I was soon after informed, you intend to give your daughter. Upon this occasion, it is my indispensible duty to acquaint you, that if his character is to be determined by his company, he will inevitably entail diseases and beggary upon his posterity, whatever be the merit of his wife, or the affluence of his fortune. He overtook me on the road from London a few weeks ago, in company with a wretch, who by their discourse appeared to
 
be his old and familiar acquaintance, and whom I well remember to have been brought before my friend Justice Worthy, when I was accidentally at his house, as the keeper of a brothel in Covent Garden. He has since won a considerable sum with false dice at the masquerade, for which he was obliged to leave the kingdom, and is still liable to a prosecution. Be assured that I have perfect knowledge of both; for some incidents, which it is not necessary to mention, kept me near them so long on the road, that it is impossible I should be mistaken. 
 I am, Sir, your's, &c. JAMES TRUEMAN. 
 
 The moment I had read this letter, the riddle was solved. I knew Mr. Trueman to be the gentleman, whom I had concurred with a stranger, picked up by accident, to insult without provocation on the road. I was in a moment covered with confusion; and though I was alone, could not help hiding my face with my hands. I abhorred my folly, which appeared yet more enormous every time it was reviewed. 
 I courted the society of a stranger, and a stranger I persecuted with insult: thus I associated with infamy, and thus my associate became known. I hoped, however, to convince Sir George, that I had no knowledge of the wretch whose infamy I had shared, except that which I acquired from the letter of his friend. But before I had taken proper measures
 
for my justification, I had the mortification to hear, that the lady was married to a neighbouring gentleman, who had long made his addresses, and whom Sir George had before rejected in the ardor of his friendship for my father. 
 How narrow is the path of rectitude, and how much may be lost by the slightest deviation! 
 
 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 You see, my children, how cautious you ought to be in your behaviour, and how circumspect in your choice of companions. 
 
 
 MRS. EGERTON. 
 The story of Flavilla upon this subject, is a tragical, and a just picture of the dreadful effects which the want of strict regard to propriety and appearances may produce; and to which, my children, I intreat you to listen with more than common attention. 
 
 
 
 
 LEVITY OF CONDUCT: Or the Story of FLAVILLA. 
 FLAVILLA, just as she had entered her fourteenth year, was left an orphan to the care of her mother, in such circumstances as disappointed all the hopes which her education had encouraged. Her father, who lived in great elegance upon the salary of a place at court, died suddenly without having
 
made any provision for his family, except an annuity of one hundred pounds, which he had purchased for his wife with part of her marriage portion; nor was he possessed of any property, except the furniture of a large house in one of the new squares, an equipage, a few jewels, and some plate. 
 The greater part of the furniture and the equipage were sold to pay his debts; the jewels, which were not of great value, and some useful pieces of the plate, were reserved; and Flavilla removed with her mother into lodgings. 
 But notwithstanding this change in their circumstances, they did not immediately lose their rank. They were still visited by a numerous and polite acquaintance; and though some gratified their pride by assuming an appearance of pity, and rather insulted than alleviated their distress by the whine of condolence, and a minute comparison of what they had lost with what they possessed; yet from others they were continually receiving presents, which still enabled them to live with genteel frugality; they were still considered as people of fashion, and treated by those of a lower class with distinct respect. 
 Flavilla thus continued to move in a sphere to which she had no claim; she was remarkably tall for her age, and was celebrated not only for her beauty but her wit: these qualifications she considered, not only as securing whatever she enjoyed by the favour of others, but as a pledge of possessing them in her own right by an advantageous marriage. 
 There was a fashionable levity in her carriage and discourse, which her mother, who knew the danger of her situation, laboured to restrain, sometimes with anger, and sometimes with tears, but always without success. Flavilla was ever ready to answer, that she neither did or said any thing of which she had reason to be ashamed; and therefore did not know why she should be restrained, except in mere courtesy to envy, which it was an honour to provoke; or to slander, which it was a disgrace to fear. In proportion as Flavilla was more flattered and caressed, the influence of her mother became less; and though she always treated her with respect from a point of good breeding, yet she secretly despised her maxims, and applauded her own conduct. 
 Flavilla at eighteen was a celebrated toast; and among other gay visitants who frequented her tea-table, was Clodio, a young Baronet, who had just taken possession of his title and estate. There were many particulars in Clodio's behaviour, which encouraged Flavilla to hope that she should obtain him for a husband; but she suffered his assiduities with such apparent pleasure, and his familiarities with so little reserve, that he soon ventured to disclose his intention, and make her, what he thought, a very genteel proposal of another kind: but whatever were the artifices with which it was introduced, or the terms in which it was made, Flavilla rejected it with the utmost indignation and disdain. Clodio, who, notwithstanding his youth, had long known and
 
often practised the arts of seduction, gave way to the storm, threw himself at her feet, imputed his offence to the phrenzy of his passion, flattered her pride by the most abject submission and extravagant praise, intreated her pardon, aggravated his crime, but made no mention of atonement by marriage. This particular, which Flavilla did not fail to remark, ought to have determined her to admit him no more: but her vanity and her ambition were still predominant, she still hoped to succeed in her project. Clodio's offence was tacitly forgiven, his visits were permitted, his familiarities were again suffered, and his hopes revived. He had long entertained an opinion that she loved him, in which, however, it is probable, that his own vanity and her indiscretion concurred to deceive him; but this opinion, though it implied the strongest obligation to treat her with generosity and tenderness, only determined him again to attempt her ruin, as it encouraged him with a probability of success. Having therefore resolved to obtain her as a mistress, or at once to give her up, he thought he had little more to do, than to convince her that he had taken such a resolution; justifying it by some plausible sophistry, and to give her some time to deliberate upon a final determination. With this view he went a short journey into the country; having put a letter into her hand at parting, in which he acquainted her, "That he had often reflected, with inexpressible regret, upon her resentment of his conduct in a late instance; but
 
that the delicacy and the ardour of his affection were insuperable obstacles to his marriage: that where there was no liberty, there could be no happiness: that he should become indifferent to the endearments of love, when they could no longer be distinguished from the officiousness of duty: that while they were happy in the possession of each other, it would be absurd to suppose they would part; and if this happiness should cease, it would not only ensure but aggravate their misery to be inseparably united: that this event was less probable, in proportion as their cohabitation was voluntary; but that he would make such provision for her upon the contingency, as a wife would expect upon his death." 
 Flavilla had too much understanding, as well as virtue, to deliberate a moment upon this proposal. She gave immediate orders that Clodio should be admitted no more. But his letter was a temptation to gratify her vanity, which she could not resist; she shewed it first to her mother, and then to the whole circle of her female acquaintance, with all the exultation of a hero who exposes a vanquished enemy at the wheels of his chariot in a triumph; she considered it as an indisputable evidence of her virtue, as a reproof to all who had dared to censure the levity of her conduct, and a licence to continue it without apology or restraint. 
 It happened that Flavilla, soon after this accident, was seen in one of the boxes at the play-house, by Mercator, a young gentleman who had just returned
 
from his first voyage, as captain of a large ship in the Levant trade, which had been purchased for him by his father, whose fortune enabled him to make a genteel provision for five sons, of whom Mercator was the youngest, and who expected to share his estate, which was personal, in equal proportions at his death. 
 Mercator was captivated with her beauty, but discouraged by the splendor of her appearance, and the rank of her company. He was urged, rather by curiosity than hope, to enquire who she was; and he gained such a knowledge of her circumstances, as relieved him from despair. 
 As he knew not how to get admission to her company, and had no design upon her virtue, he wrote in the first ardour of his passion to her mother; giving a faithful account of his fortune and dependence, and entreating that he might be permitted to visit Flavilla as a candidate for her affection. The lady, after having made some enquiries, by which the account that Mercator had given her was confirmed, sent him an invitation, and received his first visit alone. She told him, that as Flavilla had no fortune, and as a considerable part of his own was dependent upon his father's will, he ought, therefore, to obtain his consent, before any other step was taken. To this counsel, so salutary, Mercator was hesitating what to reply, when Flavilla came in, an accident which he was now only solicitous to improve. Flavilla was not displeased either with his person or his
 
address. The frankness and gaiety of her disposition soon made him forget that he was a stranger. A conversation commenced, during which they became yet more pleased with each other; and having thus surmounted the difficulty of a first visit, he thought no more of the mother, as he believed her auspices were not necessary to his success. 
 His visits were often repeated, and he became every hour more impatient of delay. A thought of his father would now and then, indeed, intervene; but being determined to gratify his wishes at all events, he concluded with a sagacity almost universal on these occasions, that of two evils, to marry without his consent, was less than to marry against it; and one evening, after the lovers had spent the afternoon by themselves, they went out in a kind of frolic, which Mercator had proposed in the vehemence of his passion, and to which Flavilla had consented in the giddiness of her indiscretion, and were married at May-Fair chapel. 
 In the first interval of recollection after this precipitate step, Mercator considered, that he ought to be the first to acquaint his father of the new alliance which had been made in his family: but as he had not fortitude enough to do it in person, he expressed it in the best terms he could conceive by a letter; and requested that he might be permitted to present his wife for the parental benediction, which alone was wanting to complete his felicity. 
 The old gentleman, whose character I cannot better express than in the fashionable phrase which has been contrived to palliate false principles and dissolute manners, had been a gay man, and was well acquainted with the town. He had often heard Flavilla toasted by rakes of quality, and had often seen her at public places. Her beauty and her dependence, the gaiety of her dress, the multitude of her admirers, the levity of her conduct, and all the circumstances of her situation, had concurred to render her character suspected; and he was disposed to judge of it with yet less charity, when, as she had offended him by marrying his son, whom he considered as disgraced and impoverished, and whose misfortune, as it was irretrievable, he resolved not to alleviate, but increase: a resolution by which fathers, who have foolish and disobedient sons, usually display their own kindness and wisdom. As soon as he read Mercator's letter, he execrated him for a fool, who had been gulled by the artifices of a loose woman, to screen her from public infamy, by fathering her children, and securing her from a prison by appropriating her debts. In his answer, which he wrote only to gratify his resentment, he told him, that "if he had taken Flavilla into keeping, he would have overlooked it; and if her extravagance had distressed him, he would have satisfied his creditors; but that his marriage was not to be forgiven; that he should never have a shilling of his money; and that he was determined to see him no more." 
 Mercator, who was more provoked by this outrage than grieved at his loss, disdained to reply; and believing that he had now most reason to be offended, could not be persuaded to solicit a reconciliation. 
 He hired a genteel apartment for his wife of an upholsterer, who, with a view to let lodgings, had taken and furnished a large house, near Leicester-fields; and in about two months, he left her, and made another voyage. 
 He had received visits of congratulation from her numerous acquaintance, and had returned them as a pledge of his desire that they should be repeated. But a remembrance of the gay multitude, which, while he was at home, had flattered his vanity, as soon as he was absent, alarmed his suspicions. He had, indeed, no particular cause of jealousy; but his anxiety arose merely from a sense of the temptations to which she was exposed, and the impossibility of his superintending her conduct. 
 In the mean time Flavilla continued to flutter round the same giddy circle in which she had shone so long; the number of her visitants rather increased than diminished; the gentlemen attended with yet greater assiduity; and she continued to encourage their civilities by the same indiscreet familiarity: She was one night at the masquerade, another night at an opera; sometimes at a route; sometimes rambling in parties of pleasure in short excursions from
 
town; she came home at midnight, in the morning, and sometimes she was absent several nights together. 
 This conduct was the cause of much speculation and uneasiness to the good man and woman of the house. At first they suspected that Flavilla was no better than a woman of pleasure; and that the person who had hired the lodgings for her as his wife, and had disappeared upon pretence of a voyage to sea, had been employed to impose upon them, by concealing her character, in order to obtain such accommodations for her as she could not so easily have procured had it been known: But as these suspicions made them watchful and inquisitive, they soon discovered, that many ladies by whom she was visited, were of good character and fashion. Her conduct, however, supposing her to be a wife, was still inexcusable, and still endangered their credit and subsistence: hints were often dropped by the neighbours to the disadvantage of her character; and an elderly maiden lady, who lodged in the second floor, had given warning: the family was disturbed at all hours in the night, and the door was crouded all day with messengers and visitants to Flavilla. 
 One day, therefore, the mistress of the house took an opportunity to remonstrate, though in the most distant and respectful terms, and with the utmost diffidence and caution. She told Flavilla, "That she was a fine young lady, that her husband was abroad, that she kept a great deal of company, and that the world was censorious: she wished that less
 
occasion for scandal was given; and hoped to be excused the liberty she had taken. Flavilla might be ruined by those slanders which could have no influence upon the great, and which, therefore, the great were not solicitous to avoid." 
 This address, however ambiguous, and however gentle, was easily understood, and fiercely resented. Flavilla, proud of her virtue, and impatient of controul, would have despised the counsel of a philosopher, if it had implied an impeachment of her conduct: before a person so much her inferior, therefore, she was under no restraint; she answered with a mixture of contempt and indignation, "That those only who did not know her, would dare to take any liberty with her character; and warned her to propagate no scandalous report at her peril." Flavilla immediately rose from her seat, and the mistress of the house departed without reply, though she was scarce less offended than her lodger, and from that moment she determined, when Mercator returned, to give warning. 
 Mercator's voyage was prosperous, and, after an absence of about ten months, he came back. The woman, to whom her husband had left the whole management of the lodgings, and who persisted in her purpose, soon found an opportunity to put it in execution. Mercator, as his part of the contract had been punctually fulfilled, thought he had some cause to be offended, and insisted to know her reasons for compelling him to leave her house. These she was
 
very unwilling to give; and as he perceived that she evaded his question, he became more solicitous to obtain an answer. After much hesitation, which, perhaps, had a worse effect than any tale which malice could have invented, she told him, that "The lady kept a great deal of company, and often staid out very late; that she had always been used to quiet and regularity; and was determined to let her apartment to some person in a more private station." 
 At this account Mercator changed countenance; for he inferred from it just as much more than truth as he believed it to be less. After some moments of suspence, he conjured her to conceal nothing from him, with an emotion which convinced her that she had already said too much. She then assured him, "That he had no reason to be alarmed; for that she had no exception to his lady, but those gaieties which her station and the fashion sufficiently authorized." Mercator's suspicions, however, were not wholly removed; and he began to think he had found a confidante whom it would be his interest to trust: he, therefore, in the weakness of jealousy, confessed, that, "He had some doubts concerning his wife, which it was of the utmost importance to his honour, and his peace to have resolved: he entreated her that he might continue in the apartment another year; that, as he should again leave the kingdom in a short time, she would suffer no incident, which might confirm either his hopes or his fears, to escape her notice in his absence; and that
 
at his return she would give him such an account as would at least deliver him from the torment of suspence, and determine his future conduct." 
 Mercator, however, concealed his suspicions from his wife; and, indeed, in her presence they were forgotten. Her manner of life he began seriously to disapprove; but being well acquainted with her temper, in which great sweetness was blended with a high spirit, he would not embitter the pleasure of a short stay by altercation, chiding, and tears: but when her mind was melted into tenderness at his departure, he clasped her in an extacy of fondness to his bosom, and intreated her to behave with reserve and circumspection; "Because," said he, "I know that my father keeps a watchful eye upon your conduct, which may, therefore, confirm or remove his displeasure, and either intercept or bestow such an increase of our fortune as will prevent the pangs of separation, which must otherwise so often return, and in a short time unite us to part no more." To this caution she had then no power to reply; and they parted with mutual protestations of unalterable love. 
 Flavilla, soon after she was thus left in a sort of widowhood a second time, found herself pregnant; and within somewhat less than eight months after Mercator's return from his first voyage, she happened to stumble as she was going up stairs, and being immediately taken ill, was brought to bed before the next morning. 
 It was now necessary that the vigils of whist and the tumults of balls and visits should, for a while, be suspended; and in this interval of languor and retirement Flavilla first became thoughtful. She often reflected upon Mercator's caution when they last parted, which had made an indelible impression upon her mind, though it had produced no alteration in her conduct: notwithstanding the manner in which it was expressed, and the reason upon which it was founded, she began to fear that it might have been secretly prompted by jealousy. The birth, therefore, of her first child in his absence, at a time so premature, was an accident which greatly alarmed her: but there was yet another, for which it was still less in her power to account, and which, therefore, alarmed her still more. 
 It happened that some civilities which she received from a lady who sat next her at an opera, and whom she had never seen before, introduced a conversation which so much delighted her, that she gave her a pressing invitation to visit her: this invitation was accepted, and in a few days the visit was paid. Flavilla was not less pleased at the second interview, than she had been at the first; and without making any other enquiry concerning the lady than where she lived, took the first opportunity to wait upon her. The apartment in which she was received was the ground floor of an elegant house, at a small distance from St. James's palace. It happened that Flavilla was placed near the window;
 
and a party of the horse-guards riding through the streets, she expected to see some of the royal family, and hastily threw up the sash. A gentleman who was passing by at the same instant, turned about at the noise of the window, and Flavilla no sooner saw his face than she knew him to be the father of Mercator. After looking first steadfastly at her, and then glancing his eye at the lady whom she was visiting, he affected a contemptuous sneer, and went on. Flavilla, who had been thrown into some confusion, by the sudden and unexpected sight of a person, who, she knew, considered her as the disgrace of his family, and the ruin of his child, now changed countenance, and hastily retired to another part of the room: she was touched both with grief and anger at this silent insult, of which, however, she did not then suspect the cause. It is, indeed, probable, that the father of Mercator would no where have looked upon her with complacency; but as soon as he saw her companion, he recollected that she was the favourite mistress of an old courtier, and that this was the house in which he kept her in great splendor. It happened that Flavilla, soon after this accident, discovered the character of her new acquaintance; and never remembered by whom she had been seen in her company, without the utmost regret and apprehension. 
 She now resolved to move in a less circle, and with more circumspection. In the mean time her little boy grew very fast; and it could no longer be
 
known by his appearance, that he had been born too soon. His mother frequently gazed on him with overflowing eyes; and though her pleasures were now become domestic, yet she feared lest that which had produced, should destroy them. After much deliberation, she determined that she would conceal the child's age from its father; believing it prudent to prevent a suspicion, which, however ill founded, it might be difficult to remove, as her justification would depend wholly upon the testimony of her dependents; and her mother's and her own would necessarily become doubtful, when every one would have reason to conclude, that it would still have been the same, supposing the contrary to have been true. 
 Such was the state of Flavilla's mind, and her little boy was six months old, when Mercator returned. She received him with joy indeed, but it was mixed with a visible confusion; their meeting was more tender, but on her part less chearful; she smiled with inexpressible complacency, but at the same time the tears gushed from her eyes, and she was seized with an universal tremor. Mercator caught the infection; and caressed first his Flavilla, and then his boy, with an excess of fondness and delight that before he had never expressed. The sight of the child made him more than ever wish a reconciliation with his father; and having heard, on his first landing, that he was dangerously ill, he determined to attempt, immediately, to see him; promising that he would return to supper. He had,
 
in the midst of his caresses, more than once enquired the age of his son, but the question had been always evaded; of which, however, he took no notice, nor did it produce any suspicion. 
 He was now hasting to enquire after his father; but as he passed through the hall, he was officiously laid hold of by his landlady. He was not much disposed to enquire how she had fulfilled his charge; but perceiving by her looks that she had something to communicate, which, at least in her own opinion, was of importance, he suffered her to take him into her parlour. She immediately shut the door, and reminded him, that she had undertaken an office with reluctance, which he had pressed upon her; and that she had done nothing in it to which he had not bound her by a promise; that she was extremely sorry to communicate her discoveries; but that he was a worthy gentleman, and, indeed, ought to know them. She then told him, "That the child was born within less than eight months after his last return from abroad; that it was said to have come before its time, but that having pressed to see it, she was refused." This, indeed, was true, and confirmed the good woman in her suspicion; for Flavilla, who had still resented the freedom which she had taken in her remonstrance, had kept her at a great distance; and the servants, to gratify their mistress, treated her with the utmost insolence and contempt. 
 At this relation Mercator turned pale. He now recollected that his question concerning the child's
 
 
 
 
 
birth had been evaded: and concluded, that he had been shedding tears of tenderness and joy over a faithless wife, and an illegitimate child, who had robbed him of his patrimony, his honour and his peace. He started up with the furious wildness of sudden phrenzy; but she, with great difficulty, prevailed upon him not to leave the room. He sat down and remained some time motionless, with his eyes fixed on the ground, and his hands locked in each other. In proportion as he believed his wife to be guilty, his tenderness for his father revived: and he resolved, with yet greater zeal, to prosecute his purpose of immediately attempting a reconciliation. 
 In this state of confusion and distress, he went to the house, where he learned that his father had died early in the morning, and that his relations were then assembled to read his will. Fulvius, a brother of Mercator's mother, with whom he had always been a favourite, happening to pass from one room to another, heard his voice. He accosted him with great ardour of friendship; and soothing him with expressions of condolence and affection, insisted to introduce him to the company. Mercator tacitly consented; he was received at least with civility by his brother, and sitting down among them, the will was read. He seemed to listen like the rest; but was, indeed, musing over the story which he had just heard, and lost in the speculation of his own wretchedness. He awakened as from a dream, when the voice of the person who had been reading was suspended; and finding that he could no longer contain
 
himself, he started up, and would have left the company. 
 Of the will which had been read before him, he knew nothing; but his uncle believing that he was moved with grief and resentment at the manner in which he had been mentioned in it, and the bequest only of a shilling, took him into another room; and, to apologize for his father's unkindness, told him, "that the resentment which he expressed at his marriage, was every day increased by the conduct of his wife, whose character was now become infamous, for that she had been seen at the lodgings of a certain woman of bad character, with whom she appeared to be well acquainted." This account threw Mercator into another agony; from which he was, however, at length recovered by his uncle, who, as the only expedient by which he could retrieve his misfortune, and sooth his distress, proposed that he should no more return to his lodgings, but go home with him; that he would himself take such measures with his wife, as would scarce fail of inducing her to accept a separate maintenance, to assume another name, and trouble him no more. Mercator, in the bitterness of his affliction, consented to his proposal, and they went away together. 
 Mercator, in the mean time, was expected by Flavilla with the most tender impatience. She had put her little boy to bed, and decorated a small room in which they had used to sup, and which she had shut up in his absence; she counted the moments as they passed, and listened to every carriage and every
 
step that she heard. Supper was now ready: her impatience was increased; terror was at length mingled with regret, and her fondness was only busied to afflict her; she wished, she feared, she accused, she apologized, and she wept. In the height of these eager expectations and this tender distress, she received a billet which Mercator had been persuaded by his uncle to write, in which he upbraided her in the strongest terms, with abusing his confidence; "of this, he said, he had now obtained sufficient proof to do justice to himself, and was determined to see her no more." 
 To those whose hearts have not already acquainted them with the agony which seized Flavilla upon the sight of this billet, all attempts to describe it would be not only ineffectual but absurd. Having passed the night without sleep, and the next day without food, disappointed in every attempt to discover what was become of Mercator, and doubting, if she were to find him, whether it would be possible to convince him of her innocence; this violent agitation of her mind, produced a slow fever, which, before she considered it as a disease, she communicated to the child while she cherished it at her bosom, and wept over it, as an orphan whose life she was sustaining with her own. 
 After Mercator had been absent about ten days, his uncle, who persuaded him to accompany some friends to a country seat, at the distance of near sixty miles, went to his lodgings in order to discharge the rent, and try what terms he could make
 
with Flavilla, whom he hoped to intimidate with threats of a divorce; but when he came, he found Flavilla sinking very fast under her disease, and the child dead. The woman of the house, into whose hands she had just put her watch, and some ornaments as a security for her rent, was so touched with her distress, and so firmly persuaded of her innocence by the manner in which she had addressed her, and the calm solemnity with which she absolved those by whom she had been traduced, that as soon as she had discovered Fulvius's business, she threw herself on her knees, and intreated, that if he knew where Mercator was to be found, he would urge him to return, that, if possible, the life of Flavilla might be preserved, and the happiness of both be restored by her justification. Fulvius, who still suspected appearances, or at least was in doubt of the cause that had produced them, would not discover his nephew; but after much entreaty and expostulation, at last engaged upon his honour for the conveyance of a letter. The woman as soon as she obtained his promise, ran up and communicated it to Flavilla; who, when she had recovered from the surprize and tumult which it occasioned, was supported in her bed, and in about half an hour, after many efforts, and many intervals, wrote a short billet, which was sealed and put into the hands of Fulvius. 
 Fulvius immediately inclosed and dispatched it by the post, resolving that in a question so doubtful and of such importance, he would no further interpose.
 
Mercator, who the moment he cast his eye upon the letter, knew both the hand and seal; after pausing a few moments in suspence, at length tore it, open, and read these words: 
 "Such has been my folly, that, perhaps, I should not be acquitted of guilt in any circumstances, but those in which I write. I do not, therefore, but for your sake, wish them otherwise than they are. The dear infant, whose birth has undone me, now lies dead at my side, a victim to My indiscretion and Your resentment. I am scarce able to guide my pen. But I most earnestly intreat to see you, that you may at least have the satisfaction to hear me attest my innocence with the last sigh, and seal our reconciliation on my lips, while they are yet sensible of the impression." 
 Mercator, whom an earthquake would less have affected than this letter, felt all his sensibility revive in a moment, and reflected with unalterable anguish upon the rashness of his resentment. At the thought of his distance from London, he started as at a dagger in his heart: he lifted up his eyes to heaven, with a look that expressed at once an accusation of himself, and a petition for her; and then rushing out of the house, without taking leave, or ordering a servant to attend him, he took post-horses at a neighbouring inn, and in less than six hours was in Leicester-fields. But notwithstanding his speed, he arrived too late; Flavilla had suffered the last agony, and her eyes could behold him no more. Grief and disappointment, remorse and despair now totally subverted
 
his reason. It became necessary to remove him by force from the body; and, after a confinement of two years, he died distracted. 
 May every woman on whose memory compassion shall record these events, tremble to assume the levity of Flavilla; perhaps, it is not in the power of any man, in Mercator's circumstances, to be less jealous than Mercator. 
 
 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 This, my children, is a melancholy relation, and has affected you. Reflect on the lesson it teaches, and be more prudent than Flavilla. For the present, we will give some relief to this picture, by reading a very ingenious letter: it is the spirit of levity, displayed in amiable and lovely colours, and reflects great honour on the heart and head of the lady who wrote it. 
 
 
 AMIABLE LEVITY: A LETTER from the late Miss TALBOT, To a new-born child A grand daughter of Lord Chancellor Talbot. . 
 YOU are heartily welcome, my dear little cousin, into this unquiet world; long may you continue in it, in all the happiness it can give; and bestow enough on all your friends, to answer fully the impatience with which you have been expected. May you grow up to have every accomplishment, that
 
your good friend the Dr. Rundle. bishop of Derry can already imagine in you; and in the mean time, may you have a nurse with a tuneable voice, that may not talk an immoderate deal of nonsense to you. 
 You are, at present, my dear, in a very philosophical disposition; the gaieties and follies of life have no attraction for you: its sorrows you kindly commiserate; but, however, do not suffer them to disturb your slumbers; and find charms in nothing but harmony and repose. You have as yet contracted no partialities, are entirely ignorant of party distinctions, and look with a perfect indifference on all human splendor. You have an absolute dislike to the vanities of dress; and are likely for many months to observe the Dr. Secker; afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury; with whom Miss Talbot lived. Bishop of Bristol's first rule of conversation, silence; though tempted to transgress it by the novelty and strangeness of all the objects round you. As you advance farther in life, this philosophical temper will, by degrees, wear off: the first object of your admiration will probably be a candle; and thence, (as we all of us do) you will contract a taste for the gaudy and the glaring, without making one moral reflection upon the danger of such false admiration, as leads people, many a time, to burn their fingers. You will then begin to shew great partiality for some very good aunts, who will contribute all they can towards spoiling you; but you will be equally fond of an excellent mamma, who
 
will teach you, by her example, all sorts of good qualities; only let me warn you of one thing, my dear, and that is, do not learn of her to have such an immoderate love of home; for it is quite contrary to all the privileges of this polite age; nor to give up so entirely all those pretty graces of whim, flutter, and affectation, which so many charitable poets have declared to be the prerogative of our sex: ah! my poor cousin, to what purpose will you boast this prerogative, when your nurse tells you, with a pious care, to sow the seeds of jealousy and emulation as early as possible, that you have a fine little brother come to put your nose out of joint. There will be nothing to be done then, I believe, but to be mighty good, and prove what, believe me, admits of very little dispute, (though it has occasioned abundance) that we girls, however people give themselves airs of being disappointed, are by no means to be despised: let the men unenvied shine in public, it is we must make their homes delightful to them; and, if they provoke us, no less uncomfortable. I do not expect you my dear, to answer this letter yet-a-while; but, as I dare say, you have the greatest interest with your papa, will beg you to prevail upon him, that we may know by a line, (before his time is engrossed by another secret committee) that you and your mamma are well. In the mean time I will only assure you, that all here rejoice in your existence extremely: and that I am, 
 My very young correspondent, most affectionately your's, C. T. 
 
 
 
 MR. EGERTON. 
 I have now, my dear children, only a few words to add. We are going, for a little while, from a happy retirement, where truth and peace and innocence delight to dwell, into the regions of pleasure, folly, and ambition. Let not your eyes be dazzled with false glare, nor your hearts tempted with imaginary delights. Drink not too deep at the fascinating fountain of pleasure, left you should either be inebriated or surfeited. It is true, your present danger is not very great; you will have faithful and interested directors, whose care and caution will counterbalance the impetuous sallies of youthful imagination; but beware of contracting a love for fancied pleasures, which you will behold so many pursuing with thoughtless impetuosity, and who stop not in their career, till suddendly impeded by poverty, disease, or unsuspected ruin. Remember the serene, the chearful joys you have so often been partakers of in this place, and let not your passions hurry you away from the calm and permanent content, which reason and reflection never fail to give. When you go into public, be willing to be pleased, but not infatuated. In short, my children, remember the examples you have so often read of in this happy room: think on the inevitable consequences of good and bad, of wise and foolish conduct: forget not how deeply interested are the mother who has done and suffered so much for you, and the father whose labours have been unceasing to make you truly virtuous and beneficent members of society forget not,
 
I say, my dear, dear children, how much it is in your power to heap blessings or curses, to render happy or miserable, parents, of whose dear and tender affection you have had so many and such indisputable proofs. You will yourselves, I hope, hereafter, become happy parents; you will then know the force of parental anxieties, and parental joys. I cannot describe them; endeavour to imagine what they are from the following story. 
 
 
 
 
 PARENTAL FEELINGS: Or the ABENAKEE INDIAN. 
 DURING the last war in America, a band of savages having surprised and defeated a party of the English, such of those who were not actually killed on the spot, had very little chance of getting away from enemies who were much quicker of foot than they, and who, pursuing them with unrelenting fury, used those whom they overtook with a barbarity, even in those countries, almost without example. 
 A young English officer, pressed by two savages who were making at him with uplifted hatchets, without the least hope of escaping death, thought of nothing but selling his life as dear as he could. At the instant, an old savage, armed with his bow, drew near him, in order to pierce him with the arrow; when taking aim at him, all on a sudden drops his point, and runs to throw himself between the young Englishman and the two Barbarians, who were going to massacre him. These drew back out of respect to the motions of the old man, who, with
 
signs of peace, took the officer by the hand, after removing his apprehensions by friendly gestures, and carried him home with him to his hut. There he treated him with humanity and gentleness, more like his companion than his slave. He taught him the Abenakee language, and the coarse arts in use among those people, and they lived well satisfied with each other. One only point of the old man's deportment gave the young officer uneasiness; he frequently observed the savage fixing his eyes upon him, and, after looking long and steadfastly at him, shedding tears. 
 On the return of spring, the Abenakees took the field again, and proceeded in quest of the English. 
 The old man, who had still vigour enough to bear the fatigues of war, went along with his countrymen; not forgetting to take his prisoner with him. They made a march of above two hundred leagues, through the trackless wilds and forests of that country, till at length they came within view of a plain in which they discovered an English camp. This the old man shewed to his young companion, at the same time attentively eyeing him, and marking his countenance; "There (says he) are thy brothers waiting to give us battle. What sayest thou? I preserved thee from death. I have taught thee to build canoes; to make bows and arrows; to catch the deer of the forest; to wield the hatchet; and our whole art of war. What wast thou when I took thee home to my dwelling? Thy hands were as the hands of a mere child, they could serve thee
 
but little for thy defence, and yet less for providing thee means of sustenance. Thy soul was in the dark: thou wert a stranger to all necessary knowledge. To me thou owest life the means of life every thing. Couldst thou then be ungrateful enough to go over to join thy countrymen, and to lift the hatchet against us?" 
 The young Englishman answered, that he could not but feel a just repugnance to carrying arms against those of his own nation, but that he would never turn them against the Abenakees, whom, so long as he should live, he would consider as his brothers. 
 At this the dejected savage hung his head, and lifting up his hands covered his face with them, in a deep meditation. After remaining some time in this attitude, he looked earnestly at the English officer, and said to him with a mixture of grief and tenderness, "Hast thou a father?" "He was alive, answered the young man, when I left my country." "Oh, unhappy man!" said the savage. After a moment's pause, adding, "Dost thou not know that I too was once a father? Alas! I am no longer one. No: I am no longer a father! I saw my son fall. He fought by my side: I saw him die like a man, covered with wounds as he fell! But I revenged him." 
 He pronounced these words with the most pathetic emphasis, and shuddered; his breast heaved with pain, and he was choaked with inward groans, which he endeavoured to stifle. His eyes looked wild, but
 
no tear fell. By degrees the violence of his agitations ceased, and he grew calm. Turning towards the east, he pointed to the rising sun, and said, "Seest thou yon beauteous luminary, that sun in all its splendor? Does the sight of it afford thee pleasure?" "Undoubtedly, answered the officer, who can behold so fine a sky without delight?" "And yet to me, said the savage, it no longer affords any!" Then casting his eye on a bush in full flower, "See! said he, young man, doth not that gay appearance of flowers give thee a sort of joy to look at?" "It does," replied the officer. "And yet, said the old man, it delighteth not me!" adding, with impetuosity, "depart haste, fly to yon camp of thy friends. Get thee home to thy Father, that he may still behold with pleasure the rising of the sun, and the flowers of the spring." 

 
 
 

